@node The Command-Line Client
@chapter The Command-Line Client
@cindex CLI
@cindex ownsona command

OwnSona ships with a small standalone CLI under @file{cli/} for
reading from and writing to the memory store from the terminal.  It's
useful for scripting, ad-hoc edits, and bulk-loading facts.  Written in
portable C; builds on Linux, macOS, and Windows (MSYS2 UCRT64) with one
runtime dependency: libcurl.

Each MCP tool maps to a subcommand:

@example
ownsona add    "<text>"           # remember
ownsona query  "<question>"       # recall
ownsona search "<substring>"      # text_search
ownsona list                      # list_memories
ownsona update <id> "<text>"      # update_memory
ownsona confirm <id>              # confirm
ownsona forget <id>               # forget
ownsona prompt "<user prompt>"    # build_context_prompt
ownsona import FILE               # remember_batch (JSON or one-per-line)
ownsona teach  FILE               # extract facts from prose via an LLM
@end example

The @code{teach} subcommand is covered in its own chapter
(@pxref{The teach Workflow}).  The others are documented here.

@menu
* Building the CLI::
* Configuring the CLI::
* Subcommand reference::
* Output and JSON modes::
* Exit codes::
@end menu

@node Building the CLI
@section Building the CLI

Install build dependencies per platform (one-line):

@table @asis
@item Linux (Fedora)
@code{sudo dnf install gcc make libcurl-devel openssl-devel zlib-devel}

@item Linux (Debian / Ubuntu)
@code{sudo apt install build-essential libcurl4-openssl-dev libssl-dev zlib1g-dev}

@item macOS (Homebrew)
@code{brew install curl openssl@@3 pkg-config}

@item Windows (MSYS2 UCRT64)
@code{pacman -S mingw-w64-ucrt-x86_64-toolchain mingw-w64-ucrt-x86_64-curl mingw-w64-ucrt-x86_64-openssl}
@end table

Then build:

@example
cd cli
make            # builds ./ownsona (or ownsona.exe on Windows)
make test       # sanity-check the binary, no server traffic
@end example

The Makefile detects the platform via @code{uname -s} and asks
@code{curl-config --static-libs} for static linker flags.  Static
linking works on macOS Homebrew and MSYS2 UCRT64; on Fedora and
Debian/Ubuntu it falls back to dynamic linking (libcurl required on
the target machine).

The binary is small (~80--100 KB dynamically linked, ~3-5 MB
statically).

@node Configuring the CLI
@section Configuring the CLI

Two kinds of settings:

@itemize @bullet
@item @b{MCP server credentials} --- always needed.
@item @b{LLM credentials} --- only needed by the @code{teach} subcommand.
@end itemize

@subsection Default config file location

If you do not pass @code{--config PATH} and do not set
@code{$OWNSONA_CONFIG}, the CLI looks at an OS-specific default:

@multitable @columnfractions .25 .75
@headitem OS @tab Default config path
@item Linux / BSD @tab @file{~/.config/ownsona/config.ini}
@item macOS       @tab @file{~/Library/Application Support/ownsona/config.ini}
@item Windows     @tab @code{%LOCALAPPDATA%\ownsona\config.ini}
@end multitable

Create the parent directory if it doesn't exist
(@code{mkdir -p ~/.config/ownsona} on Linux, etc.).

@subsection Resolution order

For every setting, highest priority wins:

@enumerate
@item CLI flag (@code{--config}, @code{--server}, @code{--token}, ...).
@item Environment variable (@code{OWNSONA_SERVER}, @code{OWNSONA_TOKEN},
@code{OWNSONA_LLM_API_KEY}, etc.).
@item Config file at @code{$OWNSONA_CONFIG} or the OS-specific default.
@item Built-in defaults (only for LLM-side keys).
@end enumerate

@subsection Authenticating to the server

@cindex ownsona auth login
@cindex OAuth (CLI)

The CLI talks to OwnSona over OAuth 2.1, just like every other MCP
client.  The first time you point it at a server, run:

@example
ownsona auth login
@end example

That subcommand discovers your server's authorization server,
registers the CLI dynamically (RFC 7591), opens a browser tab to
@code{https://@var{your-host}/oauth/authorize}, and waits for the
redirect.  You enter your @code{OWNSONA_LOGIN_USERNAME} /
@code{OWNSONA_LOGIN_PASSWORD} (from the server's
@file{application.ini}), click @b{Allow}, and the CLI stores the
resulting access + refresh tokens in its config file.  From then on
every subcommand transparently refreshes the access token as needed.

Inspect status with @code{ownsona auth status}; it prints the auth
mode, the refresh token's TTL, and how much time is left on the
current access token.

@subsection Config file format

INI-style.  @code{#} and @code{;} start comments.  @code{[sections]}
are parsed but ignored.  A template ships at
@file{cli/config.ini.example}:

@example
# --- MCP server (required for every subcommand) ---
server_url = https://@var{your-host}/mcp

# --- OAuth credentials (populated by `ownsona auth login`) ---
# Edit these directly only if you know what you're doing.
oauth_client_id                  = <generated-by-dynamic-registration>
oauth_refresh_token              = <stored-by-auth-login>
oauth_access_token               = <stored-by-auth-login>
oauth_access_token_expires_at    = <unix-epoch-seconds>

# --- LLM (used only by `teach`) ---
llm_api_key  = sk-...
llm_model    = gpt-4o
llm_base_url = https://api.openai.com/v1
subject_name = Blake

# --- Legacy / external-IdP path ---
# If your OwnSona instance is fronted by a different IdP (Cloudflare
# Access, oauth2-proxy, ...) that hands you a static bearer token,
# put it here.  Mutually exclusive with the OAuth fields above.
# token = <static-bearer-from-external-idp>
@end example

The default mode is OAuth.  The @code{token =} field exists only as
a legacy escape hatch for users fronting OwnSona with an external
identity provider that issues static bearer tokens --- it is not the
path against a vanilla OwnSona install, and the embedded AS does
not accept it.  See @ref{Re-authenticating} in @ref{Connecting OpenAI}
for cases when an existing OAuth session stops working.

@node Subcommand reference
@section Subcommand reference

Global options come @b{before} the subcommand name; subcommand options
come after:

@example
ownsona [--config PATH] [--server URL] [--token TOKEN] [--json] <command> [...]
@end example

Run @code{ownsona --help} for top-level help, @code{ownsona <command>
--help} for per-command help.

@subsection Common flags

@table @code
@item --tags T1,T2,...
Comma-separated tags.  Used by @code{add}, @code{update}, @code{query}
(as a filter), @code{import} (default for line-format files),
@code{teach}.

@item --limit N
Cap on returned rows.  Used by @code{query}, @code{search}, @code{list},
@code{prompt}.

@item --dedup POLICY
One of @code{insert}, @code{skip_if_near}, @code{ask}.  Default
@code{ask} for @code{add}; @code{skip_if_near} for @code{teach}.

@item --expires-at, --last-confirmed-at
ISO 8601 timestamps on @code{add} and @code{update}.
@end table

@subsection add (remember)

@example
ownsona add "My dog's name is Mochi." --tags family,pets
@end example

Output: @code{Ok (id=42)}.

@subsection query (recall)

@example
ownsona query "what is my dog's name"
@end example

Output:

@example
1 match
  [42] score=0.913  My dog's name is Mochi.
    tags: family pets
    at:   2026-05-16T12:00:00Z
@end example

@subsection search (text_search)

Plain substring search:

@example
ownsona search "Mochi"
@end example

@subsection list

Recent memories, newest first.  @code{--include-deleted} also shows
tombstones.

@example
ownsona list --limit 20
@end example

@subsection update (update_memory)

@example
ownsona update 42 "My dog's name is Mochi and she's a Shiba Inu."
@end example

@subsection confirm

Refresh @code{last_confirmed_at} without rebuilding the embedding:

@example
ownsona confirm 42
@end example

@subsection forget

Soft-delete by default; @code{--hard} drops the row entirely.  Pair
with @code{--reason} or @code{--replaced-by} to leave a tombstone trail
(rejected with @code{--hard}, since there's no row left to attach the
reason to).

@example
ownsona forget 42
ownsona forget 42 --reason "misremembered name" --replaced-by 99
ownsona forget 42 --hard
@end example

@subsection prompt (build_context_prompt)

@example
ownsona prompt "What should I name my new dog?" --max-chars 1000
@end example

Pipe straight into another LLM:

@example
ownsona prompt "What should I name my new dog?" | some-llm-cli
@end example

@subsection import (remember_batch)

Bulk-load from a JSON array or a one-fact-per-line text file.  The CLI
chunks the input into batches of 200 (@code{MAX_BATCH_SIZE}).

@example
ownsona import facts.txt  --tags preferences --dedup skip_if_near
ownsona import facts.json --dedup skip_if_near
@end example

JSON file format:

@example
[
  @{"text": "I live in Texas.",  "tags": ["personal"], "expires_at": "2030-01-01T00:00:00Z"@},
  @{"text": "I drive a Subaru.", "tags": ["personal"], "importance": 0.3@}
]
@end example

Text-line file format: one fact per line, blank lines and lines
starting with @code{#} are skipped.

@node Output and JSON modes
@section Output and JSON modes

Output is human-readable by default.  Pass @code{--json} (a global
flag) to get the raw MCP response, suitable for piping into @code{jq}:

@example
ownsona --json list --limit 5 | jq '.matches[] | @{id, text@}'
@end example

@node Exit codes
@section Exit codes

@multitable @columnfractions .15 .85
@headitem Code @tab Meaning
@item 0 @tab Success.
@item 1 @tab Server error, transport failure, or @code{ok:false} tool result.
@item 2 @tab Usage error (bad flag, missing arg, etc.).
@end multitable
