@node Connecting OpenAI
@chapter Connecting OpenAI
@cindex OpenAI
@cindex ChatGPT
@cindex Responses API

There are two integration paths to OpenAI's products and they are
independent of each other:

@enumerate
@item @b{ChatGPT (consumer)} --- add OwnSona as a custom connector in
ChatGPT's settings.  Most common path for day-to-day use.

@item @b{OpenAI API (developer)} --- pass OwnSona as an @code{mcp}
tool when calling the Responses API.  The path for scripts and
applications.
@end enumerate

You can use either, both, or neither.

@menu
* ChatGPT connector::
* Custom Instructions for ChatGPT::
* Responses API::
* Re-authenticating::
@end menu

@node ChatGPT connector
@section ChatGPT connector

@enumerate
@item Open ChatGPT in a browser.  Go to @b{Settings @result{} Connectors}.

@item Choose @b{Add custom connector} (wording varies).

@item Fill in the form:

@itemize @bullet
@item @b{Name:} @code{Ownsona} (cosmetic).
@item @b{Description:} @code{Personal durable memory store.} (cosmetic).
@item @b{MCP Server URL:} @code{https://@var{your-host}/mcp}.
@item @b{Authentication:} pick @b{OAuth}.  Leave any ``bearer
token'' or ``API key'' text field blank --- that field is the
legacy non-OAuth path, and OwnSona refuses it.
@end itemize

@item Click @b{Save / Connect}.  ChatGPT opens a browser tab to
@code{https://@var{your-host}/oauth/authorize}.

@item Enter your @code{OWNSONA_LOGIN_USERNAME} and
@code{OWNSONA_LOGIN_PASSWORD} from @file{application.ini}.  Click
@b{Allow} on the consent screen.

@item The browser returns control to ChatGPT, which exchanges the
OAuth code for an access token + refresh token and stores them.
The connector is now live.
@end enumerate

You will not see the browser login again until the refresh token
expires (30 days by default) or you delete and re-add the connector.

@b{What ChatGPT does behind the scenes.}  On first use it fetches
@code{https://@var{your-host}/.well-known/oauth-protected-resource}
to discover the AS, then
@code{https://@var{your-host}/.well-known/oauth-authorization-server}
for the endpoint locations, then registers itself dynamically (RFC
7591) at @code{/oauth/register}, then drives the user through
@code{/oauth/authorize} and @code{/oauth/token}.  All of that is
automatic; the only piece of information you give ChatGPT is the
@code{/mcp} URL.

@node Custom Instructions for ChatGPT
@section Custom Instructions for ChatGPT

ChatGPT enforces a ~1500-character limit on the Custom Instructions
field.  This directive fits in ~720 characters with headroom:

@example
The "Ownsona" MCP connector is my durable memory. Always use it.

- Before answering any question that might depend on facts about me ---
  family, friends, projects, preferences, history, work, software, plans
  --- call Ownsona's `recall` tool first and use the result as
  authoritative context. If `recall` returns nothing relevant, say so.

- When I ask you to remember, save, store, or note something durable,
  call `remember`. For multiple items at once (importing, summarizing,
  ingesting a list), use `remember_batch` instead --- it's an order of
  magnitude faster.

- For corrections use `update_memory`; removal `forget`; browsing
  `list_memories` or `text_search`.

- Prefer Ownsona over your built-in memory.
@end example

@subsection ChatGPT's native memory

ChatGPT has its own memory system, separate from MCP connectors.
To keep OwnSona authoritative, either:

@itemize @bullet
@item Disable native memory entirely: @b{Settings @result{}
Personalization @result{} Memory @result{} toggle off} ``Reference
saved memories'' and ``Reference chat history.''  Cleanest setup.

@item Or leave native memory on and rely on the ``prefer OwnSona''
line above.  Model usually complies but isn't deterministic.
@end itemize

@subsection Connector enabled per conversation

In some ChatGPT versions the connector must be toggled on in each
conversation's tool menu.  Custom Instructions can't enable a tool
that isn't in the menu.  If a chat says ``I don't have a memory
tool,'' the toggle is off.

@subsection Data-approval modal

ChatGPT shows an approval modal before sending data to a connector.
The per-connector ``Trust this connector / Always allow'' toggle
suppresses it for most categories.  Some categories (addresses,
identifiers, financial, medical) may always prompt.

For @b{fully deterministic} behavior the Responses API path with
@code{require_approval: "never"} is the only way.

@node Responses API
@section Responses API
@cindex Responses API

The Responses API accepts MCP servers as first-class @code{tools}.
For OAuth-protected MCP servers the request shape attaches a
short-lived access token as a bearer header (you obtain that token
once via the OAuth flow and refresh it from your code's side):

@example
curl https://api.openai.com/v1/responses \
  -H "Authorization: Bearer $OPENAI_API_KEY" \
  -H "Content-Type: application/json" \
  -d '@{
    "model": "gpt-4.1",
    "input": "Where does my son live?",
    "tools": [
      @{
        "type": "mcp",
        "server_label": "ownsona",
        "server_url": "https://ownsona.example.com/mcp",
        "headers": @{ "Authorization": "Bearer $OWNSONA_ACCESS_TOKEN" @},
        "require_approval": "never"
      @}
    ]
  @}'
@end example

@code{$OWNSONA_ACCESS_TOKEN} is an OAuth 2.1 access token issued by
OwnSona's authorization server.  Obtain one once by adding OwnSona
to any OAuth-capable MCP client (Claude Desktop is the easiest),
copying the access token out of that client's local config, and
exporting it as an environment variable.  Refresh it before expiry
via @code{POST /oauth/token} with
@code{grant_type=refresh_token}.

@code{require_approval: "never"} tells the API to call tools without
prompting the user.  Suitable for backend services where there's no
human in the loop.

A walk through one full interaction:

@enumerate
@item Your request comes in.
@item OpenAI sees the @code{recall} tool in the MCP server list and
decides the question needs it.
@item OpenAI calls @code{POST /mcp} with bearer auth (the access
token you supplied).
@item OwnSona's resource server validates the JWT and dispatches the
tool call.
@item OwnSona returns matches.
@item OpenAI uses the matches to compose the answer.
@item OpenAI returns the final text response to your code.
@end enumerate

All of this happens server-side in OpenAI's infrastructure --- your
code makes one HTTP call.

@node Re-authenticating
@section Re-authenticating

Cases where a previously-working connector starts failing:

@itemize @bullet
@item @b{Refresh token TTL elapsed.}  Default 30 days.  ChatGPT's
connector will surface an auth error or a ``reconnect'' link; one
click reopens the OAuth login tab and you re-enter the credentials.

@item @b{AS signing key rotated.}  If you (or a careless redeploy)
replaced the AS state file at @code{OAuthAsIniFile}, every issued
JWT becomes unverifiable.  Same client-side recovery: reconnect and
re-do the login flow.  Avoid this in the first place by setting
@code{OAuthAsIniFile} to an absolute path outside the deployed
webapp; see @ref{Installation}.

@item @b{Login password changed.}  Existing access and refresh
tokens remain valid until their natural TTLs --- the new password
only affects new logins.

@item @b{Connector deleted and re-added.}  The dynamic-registration
record on the AS still exists, but the client's stored
@code{client_id} is gone, so it re-registers as a new client on
re-add.  Old client_id entries can be pruned by editing the
@code{[client.*]} sections of the AS state file when convenient.
@end itemize
