@node Configuration
@chapter Configuration
@cindex configuration
@cindex application.ini

OwnSona reads every setting from a single file:
@file{src/main/backend/application.ini}.  The file is INI-format, all
keys live under the @code{[main]} section, and the servlet loads it
once at startup via Kiss's @code{MainServlet.readIniFile} mechanism.

The file is gitignored.  A template lives at
@file{src/main/backend/application.ini.example}; copy it on first
install and edit in place.

@b{When a change to @file{application.ini} takes effect.}  Editing the
source-tree copy alone does nothing.  The build (@code{./bld -v
build && ./bld war}) copies the file into the WAR.  When you replace
the deployed WAR, the servlet picks up the new values on next start.
Tomcat's @code{autoDeploy="true"} restarts the webapp automatically
about ten seconds after the WAR replaces the previous one; restart
the service explicitly with @code{systemctl restart ownsona.service}
if you want it immediate.

@menu
* Required keys::
* OAuth keys::
* Optional keys with defaults::
* Database keys::
* Embedding keys::
* Tunables::
* Re-embedding flag::
@end menu

@node Required keys
@section Required keys

These must be set or the servlet refuses to load.

@table @code
@item OWNSONA_LOGIN_USERNAME
Username the OAuth AS consent page accepts.  You invent this --- it
is unrelated to any external account.  Typed into a browser tab
when an MCP client first connects to your server; never sent to or
from any external service.

@item OWNSONA_LOGIN_PASSWORD
Password paired with @code{OWNSONA_LOGIN_USERNAME}.  Same notes
apply: you invent it, it lives only in this file and in
@code{OwnsonaUserAuthenticator}, and it's typed only into the AS
consent page.

@item EMBEDDING_API_KEY
The API key for the embeddings endpoint.  Vendor-agnostic in name;
in practice an OpenAI key today.  If you swap providers, this is the
key for the new provider.

@item EMBEDDING_DIMENSIONS
The vector length the active model produces.  @b{Must match the
@code{vector(N)} column type} in @file{sql/001_init.sql}.  Mismatch
fails every insert at the database with a vector-length error.
@end table

@node OAuth keys
@section OAuth keys
@cindex OAuth keys
@cindex OAuthAuthorizationServer
@cindex OAuthAsEnabled
@cindex OAuthAsIniFile

A standard single-host embedded-AS deployment needs two OAuth keys.
A production install typically adds a third
(@code{OAuthAsIniFile}) to keep AS state outside the redeploy
surface.

@table @code
@item OAuthAuthorizationServer
@b{Required}.  The canonical public URL of the OwnSona server, with
scheme (e.g.@: @code{https://ownsona.example.com}).  This single URL
drives several derived defaults: the resource identifier, the AS
issuer, and the JWKS URI all derive from it unless explicitly
overridden.  No trailing slash --- the validator trims it but
matching is easier to reason about when the configured value is
canonical.

@item OAuthAsEnabled
@b{Required for the embedded AS.}  Set to @code{true} to turn on
the AS endpoints (@code{/oauth/authorize}, @code{/oauth/token},
@code{/oauth/register}, @code{/oauth/jwks}, and the metadata
documents under @code{/.well-known/}).  When unset or false, the
endpoints return 404.

@item OAuthAsIniFile
Default @code{oauth.ini}, resolved against the application root
(@file{WEB-INF/backend/} in the deployed Tomcat).  @b{Strongly
recommended for production:} set this to an absolute path outside
the deployed webapp, e.g.@: @code{/home/ownsona/oauth.ini} or
@code{/var/lib/ownsona/oauth.ini}.  Without that, every WAR redeploy
rewrites the file, silently rotating the AS signing key and forcing
every MCP client through the browser OAuth flow again.  See
@ref{Installation} for the full discussion.

@item OAuthRequiredScopes
Optional comma- or space-separated list of scopes every access
token must carry.  Empty (the default) means ``any token signed by
the AS for the right audience is accepted.''  Single-user installs
typically leave this empty.

@item OAuthResourceIdentifier
Optional override for the value tokens must carry as @code{aud}.
Defaults to @code{OAuthAuthorizationServer}.  Set this if you want
tokens bound to a more specific URL (e.g.@:
@code{https://@var{your-host}/mcp}).

@item OAuthAsIssuer
Optional override for the AS issuer URL announced in the metadata
document.  Defaults to @code{OAuthAuthorizationServer}.

@item OAuthJwksUri
Optional override for the JWKS URL the resource server fetches keys
from.  Default is auto-discovered from the AS's RFC 8414 metadata.
Set this only when pointing the RS at an AS that publishes neither
RFC 8414 nor OIDC discovery (rare).

@item OAuthAccessTokenTtlSeconds
Default @code{3600} (1 hour).  Longer-lived tokens are harder to
revoke; shorter ones force more frequent refresh exchanges.

@item OAuthRefreshTokenTtlSeconds
Default @code{2592000} (30 days).  When this elapses the client
transparently opens the browser again for re-login.

@item OAuthAllowDynamicRegistration
Default @code{true}.  Disabling this breaks every modern MCP client
that registers itself via RFC 7591.
@end table

@node Optional keys with defaults
@section Optional keys with defaults

@table @code
@item EMBEDDING_PROVIDER
Default @code{openai}.  Recorded on every row's @code{embedding_provider}
column so the system can tell which provider produced which vector.

@item OWNSONA_USER_ID
Default @code{default}.  Single-user mode stamps every memory with this
value.  Multi-user is deliberately unsupported.

@item DEFAULT_RECALL_LIMIT
Default @code{8}.  Number of memories returned by @code{recall} when
the caller doesn't specify @code{limit}.

@item MAX_RECALL_LIMIT
Default @code{50}.  Hard cap on the @code{limit} parameter of any
read tool.  A client asking for 1000 gets 50.

@item MAX_TEXT_CHARS
Default @code{16000}.  Hard cap on a single memory's @code{text}.
Anything longer is rejected with @code{INVALID_INPUT}.

@item MAX_BATCH_SIZE
Default @code{200}.  Max items per @code{remember_batch} call.
@end table

@node Database keys
@section Database keys

Kiss reads these directly; OwnSona doesn't process them.

@table @code
@item DatabaseType
Must be @code{PostgreSQL}.  Other databases lack @code{pgvector} (or
the rest of the schema features we use) and are not supported.

@item DatabaseHost
Hostname or IP.  Usually @code{localhost} since the DB lives on the
same VM as Tomcat.

@item DatabasePort
Default @code{5432}.

@item DatabaseName
Default @code{ownsona}.

@item DatabaseUser
Default @code{ownsona}.

@item DatabasePassword
Generated by @file{sql/setup_db.sh} or set by hand.

@item DatabaseConnectionParameters
Optional.  Appended to the JDBC URL --- e.g.@: @code{sslmode=require}.
@end table

@node Embedding keys
@section Embedding keys

@table @code
@item EMBEDDING_ENDPOINT
The full URL of the embeddings POST endpoint.  For OpenAI:
@code{https://api.openai.com/v1/embeddings}.  For an OpenAI-compatible
proxy, point at the proxy.  For a self-hosted Ollama with the OpenAI
shim, e.g.@: @code{http://localhost:11434/v1/embeddings}.

@item EMBEDDING_MODEL
The model identifier sent in the request body.  For OpenAI:
@code{text-embedding-3-small} or @code{text-embedding-3-large}.  For
other providers, the provider's model name.

@item EMBEDDING_DIMENSIONS
See @ref{Required keys}.
@end table

@node Tunables
@section Tunables

@table @code
@item MaxWorkerThreads
Default @code{30}.  Inherited from Kiss; sets the upper bound on
concurrent MCP requests.  For a single-user store, 30 is wildly more
than necessary.

@item UserInactiveSeconds
Default @code{900}.  Kiss's session-inactivity timeout.  Not used by
OwnSona's OAuth path (which is stateless and runs on JWT TTLs), but
the framework expects the key to be present.
@end table

@node Re-embedding flag
@section Re-embedding flag
@cindex REEMBED_ON_STARTUP

@table @code
@item REEMBED_ON_STARTUP
Default @code{false}.  When set to @code{true}, the server runs
@code{ReembedJob} on startup, re-embedding every row whose
@code{(embedding_provider, embedding_model)} doesn't match the active
config or whose @code{embedding} is NULL.  After a successful walk
the server auto-flips this back to @code{false} in the deployed
@file{application.ini}.

See @ref{Embedding Migration} for the full procedure.
@end table
