@node Contributing
@chapter Contributing
@cindex contributing

OwnSona is a single-user system that happens to be open source.
Contributions are welcome, with two priorities the project does not
trade away:

@itemize @bullet
@item @b{Vendor neutrality on the server side.}  No generative-LLM
calls in the request or write path.  The only vendor-coupled seam is
@code{EmbeddingProvider}.  Tool descriptions stay generic.

@item @b{Additive schema migrations.}  No drops, no renames, no data
rewrites inside a migration class.  The narrow exception is the
embedding-dim resize case documented in @ref{Embedding Migration}.
@end itemize

@menu
* How to send a patch::
* Local development::
* Running tests::
* Coding conventions::
* Documentation::
* License::
@end menu

@node How to send a patch
@section How to send a patch

The canonical home for OwnSona is
@uref{https://github.com/blakemcbride/Ownsona}.

@enumerate
@item Fork the repo.
@item Branch from @code{main}.
@item Make your change.  Keep commits small and explain the
@emph{why} in the commit message.
@item Open a pull request against @code{main}.
@end enumerate

For non-trivial changes --- new features, schema additions, new MCP
tools --- open an issue first to discuss the design.  OwnSona's
single-user, vendor-neutral, additive-migrations posture rejects some
designs that would be reasonable in a multi-tenant system; a quick
conversation upfront avoids wasted work.

@node Local development
@section Local development

@example
git clone https://github.com/blakemcbride/Ownsona.git
cd Ownsona
cp src/main/backend/application.ini.example src/main/backend/application.ini
$EDITOR src/main/backend/application.ini       # fill in DB + secrets
./bld develop                                   # frontend + backend dev servers
@end example

Hot reload covers files under @file{src/main/backend/} (services in
Java, Groovy, or Lisp).  Files under @file{src/main/core/} (Kiss) and
@file{src/main/precompiled/} require a restart of the dev server (or
a @code{./bld -v build} + restart).

@node Running tests
@section Running tests

@example
sql/run_tests.sh
@end example

Runs every JUnit 5 test under @file{src/test/precompiled/}.  Tests
gated on @code{OWNSONA_TEST_DATABASE_URL} silently skip without it:

@example
createdb -U postgres ownsona_test
psql -U postgres -d ownsona_test -f sql/001_init.sql

OWNSONA_TEST_DATABASE_URL="postgresql://ownsona:<pw>@@localhost:5432/ownsona_test" \
    sql/run_tests.sh
@end example

@b{Don't point the test URL at production.}  Integration tests
@code{TRUNCATE memories} between cases.

@node Coding conventions
@section Coding conventions
@cindex style

@itemize @bullet
@item @b{Kiss patterns first.}  Use Kiss's @code{Connection}/@code{Record}
API and @code{MainServlet.openNewConnection()} / @code{closeConnection(db,
success)}, not raw JDBC.  Use @code{org.kissweb.json.@{JSONObject,
JSONArray@}}, not external JSON libraries.

@item @b{If-statement bodies on the next line.}  Required by project
style; see @file{CLAUDE.md}.

@example
// CORRECT
if (x == null)
    return;

// CORRECT
if (x == null) @{
    return;
@}

// WRONG
if (x == null) return;
@end example

@item @b{Comments explain @emph{why}, not @emph{what}.}  Well-named
identifiers cover the @emph{what}.  Comments are for non-obvious
constraints, workarounds, or surprises.

@item @b{Additive migrations.}  See guardrail above.  A new schema
change is a new @code{Migration} class @b{plus} a registry entry
@b{plus} a @code{CURRENT_DB_VERSION} bump, all in one commit.

@item @b{Tests for behavior changes.}  If you fix a bug, add a test
that fails without your fix.
@end itemize

@node Documentation
@section Documentation

This manual lives at @file{user-manual/} as GNU TexInfo source.  Build:

@example
cd user-manual
make            # HTML, output to user-manual/html/
make pdf        # PDF (requires texi2pdf + a TeX install)
make info       # GNU info reader format
@end example

The multi-page HTML output under @file{user-manual/html/} is committed
alongside the source, so anyone browsing the repo on disk can read it
without installing texinfo.  When you edit a chapter, rebuild and
commit both the @file{.texi} change and the regenerated HTML.

Short-form reference docs at the repo root
(@file{README.md}, @file{INSTALL.md}, @file{CLI.md}, @file{REEMBED.md},
@file{MCPServer.md}, @file{OPENAI.md}, @file{OWNSONA_SPEC.md}) are
maintained alongside the manual.  They are concise quick-references;
the manual is the long-form authoritative version.  If they
disagree, the manual wins --- update the short-form doc to match.

@node License
@section License

Distributed under the BSD 2-Clause License.  See @file{LICENSE.txt}
in the source distribution for the full text.

Copyright @copyright{} 2018--2026 Blake McBride.

The OwnSona CLI vendors
@uref{https://github.com/DaveGamble/cJSON, cJSON} (MIT-licensed;
retains its own license header in @file{cli/src/cJSON.@{c,h@}}).
