@node Getting Started
@chapter Getting Started
@cindex getting started
@cindex quick start

This chapter walks you from zero to a running server, your first stored
memory, and your first recall, in roughly five command-blocks.  Each
step references the chapter that covers it in depth.

@menu
* Prerequisites::                What you need before you start.
* The five-minute path::         Just enough to see it work.
* Verify the install::           Smoke-test every tool.
* Where to next::                Reading order for the rest of the manual.
@end menu

@node Prerequisites
@section Prerequisites

@itemize @bullet
@item A Linux host you control.  A small VPS (1 vCPU, 1 GB RAM) is
enough.  The author runs his production instance on a $5/month VPS.

@item Root or sudo access on that host.

@item Java 17 or newer.  OpenJDK is fine.

@item PostgreSQL 16 or newer, with the @code{pgvector} extension
package available.

@item A domain name pointing at the host's public IP, and the ability
to obtain a TLS certificate for it.  The setup walkthrough uses Let's
Encrypt.

@item An OpenAI API key for embeddings, or another provider's key if
you intend to swap providers (see @ref{Embedding Migration}).  A
self-hosted embedding model is also fine but requires a bit more
plumbing.

@item An MCP-capable LLM client.  Claude Desktop is the easiest place
to start.
@end itemize

@node The five-minute path
@section The five-minute path

The full install lives in @ref{Installation}.  This is the abbreviated
form.

@enumerate
@item @b{Clone the repo.}

@example
git clone https://github.com/blakemcbride/Ownsona.git
cd Ownsona
@end example

@item @b{Provision the database.}

@example
sudo -u postgres createuser --pwprompt ownsona
sudo -u postgres createdb -O ownsona ownsona
sql/setup_db.sh '<the-password-you-just-set>'
@end example

This creates the schema, installs the @code{pgvector} and @code{pg_trgm}
extensions, and grants the @code{ownsona} role the privileges the
auto-migrator needs.

@item @b{Configure the server.}

@example
cp src/main/backend/application.ini.example src/main/backend/application.ini
$EDITOR src/main/backend/application.ini
@end example

At minimum, set @code{DatabasePassword}, the OAuth AS login credentials
@code{OWNSONA_LOGIN_USERNAME} / @code{OWNSONA_LOGIN_PASSWORD} (anything
you'll remember --- you'll type them once in a browser tab when you
first connect an LLM client), @code{OAuthAuthorizationServer = https://@var{your-host}},
@code{OAuthAsEnabled = true}, and @code{EMBEDDING_API_KEY}.  See
@ref{Configuration} for the full list of keys, and the
``Where the AS keeps its signing key'' subsection of
@ref{Installation} for why production installs should also set
@code{OAuthAsIniFile} to an absolute path outside the deployed webapp.

@item @b{Build and deploy.}

@example
./bld -v build
./bld war
sudo cp work/Kiss.war /home/ownsona/tomcat/webapps/ROOT.war
@end example

(See @ref{Installation} for how to set up the @code{ownsona} system user
and the @code{ownsona.service} systemd unit.)

@item @b{Smoke-test the live endpoint.}

The smoke-test script needs an OAuth access token.  The simplest way
to obtain one is to add the server as an MCP connector in any
OAuth-capable LLM client (see step 6 below for that flow); once the
client has logged in, copy the access token out of its local config
and export it:

@example
export OWNSONA_ACCESS_TOKEN="eyJhbGciOiJSUzI1NiIs..."
sql/smoke_test.sh https://@var{your-host}/mcp
@end example

A successful smoke test exercises every MCP tool against the live
server and prints @code{OK} for each.

@item @b{Connect an MCP client.}

Modern OAuth-capable clients need only the @code{/mcp} URL --- they
discover the AS, register themselves dynamically, and walk you
through a browser login.  In every client's connector form, paste:

@example
https://@var{your-host}/mcp
@end example

Pick @b{OAuth} as the auth mode (it's the default in most UIs).
The first request opens a browser tab; enter your
@code{OWNSONA_LOGIN_USERNAME} / @code{OWNSONA_LOGIN_PASSWORD} from
step 3, click @b{Allow} on the consent page, and the client stores
its tokens.  You will not see the browser flow again until the
refresh token expires (30 days by default).
@end enumerate

@node Verify the install
@section Verify the install

Once @file{sql/smoke_test.sh} reports success, your server is working.
The next step is to point a client at it.

@b{From the command line.}  Build the CLI (see @ref{The Command-Line Client})
and try:

@example
ownsona add "I started using OwnSona today." --tags meta
ownsona query "when did I start using OwnSona"
@end example

You should see your newly stored fact come back as the top recall hit.

@b{From Claude Desktop.}  Open Settings @result{} Connectors @result{}
Add and paste @code{https://@var{your-host}/mcp} as the MCP server
URL.  The client opens a browser tab to
@code{https://@var{your-host}/oauth/authorize}; enter your
@code{OWNSONA_LOGIN_USERNAME} / @code{OWNSONA_LOGIN_PASSWORD},
click @b{Allow}, and the connector is live.  See
@ref{Connecting Claude} for the full procedure.

Ask Claude ``what tools do you have?''  You should
see @code{remember}, @code{recall}, @code{remember_batch},
@code{build_context_prompt}, @code{list_memories}, @code{update_memory},
@code{forget}, @code{text_search}, and @code{confirm}.

@b{From ChatGPT (Responses API).}  See @ref{Connecting OpenAI}.

@node Where to next
@section Where to next

@itemize @bullet
@item If you got stuck during install, the long-form walkthrough is
@ref{Installation}.  The chapter is deliberately verbose --- every
sudo command is explained.

@item If your server is up and you want to understand what every MCP
tool does, read @ref{MCP Tools}.

@item If you want to bulk-load existing notes into the store (e.g.@:
from a journal or autobiography draft), see @ref{The teach Workflow}.

@item If you want to swap the embedding model or provider some day,
the procedure is in @ref{Embedding Migration}.

@item If something breaks, @ref{Troubleshooting} indexes symptoms to
causes.
@end itemize
