@node Installation
@chapter Installation
@cindex installation
@cindex setup
@cindex Ubuntu

This chapter walks through a complete install of the OwnSona MCP server
on a fresh Ubuntu 24.04 LTS system.  It is the canonical
``build-from-scratch'' procedure; if you have a recent backup,
@ref{Restore from backup} at the end of the chapter is faster.

Everything assumes you can @code{sudo}.  Commands shown without
@code{sudo} should run as the @code{ownsona} user (created in
@ref{Create the ownsona user}).

@menu
* Architecture summary::
* Install prerequisites::
* Install OS packages::
* Create the ownsona user::
* PostgreSQL with pgvector::
* Apache Tomcat 11::
* TLS certificates::
* Clone and build::
* Apply the database migration::
* Configure application.ini::
* Install the systemd service::
* Smoke test the install::
* Daily backups::
* Restore from backup::
* Upgrading an existing install::
* Operational reference::
@end menu

@node Architecture summary
@section Architecture summary

OwnSona is exposed at @code{https://<your-host>/mcp}.  Three processes
do the work:

@itemize @bullet
@item
@b{Apache Tomcat 11} terminates HTTPS and runs the Kiss-framework
webapp.  The MCP servlet lives at
@file{src/main/precompiled/ai/ownsona/MCPServer.java} and mounts at
@code{/mcp}.

@item
@b{PostgreSQL 16} with the @code{pgvector} and @code{pg_trgm}
extensions stores durable memories.

@item
@b{OpenAI's @code{text-embedding-3-small}} (or your chosen embedding
provider) turns memory text into the 1536-dim vectors that drive
recall.
@end itemize

A @code{systemd} unit (@code{ownsona.service}) supervises Tomcat.  A
timer-driven @code{ownsona-backup.service} writes daily backups to S3
via @code{s3fs}.

@node Install prerequisites
@section Prerequisites

@itemize @bullet
@item @b{Hardware:} 2 GB RAM minimum (1 GB is OOM-tight; the reference
deployment runs with 2 GB total + a 2 GB swap file).  10+ GB disk.

@item @b{OS:} Ubuntu 24.04 LTS, fresh install.  Other Debian-family
releases may work but are not tested.

@item @b{Network:} TCP 80 and 443 open inbound.  SSH open for
administration.

@item @b{DNS:} an A record pointing @code{<your-host>} (e.g.@:
@code{ownsona.example.com}) at the VM's public IP.

@item @b{Accounts:} an OpenAI account with billing enabled (the
embeddings endpoint is pay-per-use); an AWS S3 bucket if you want the
daily backups (optional).
@end itemize

@node Install OS packages
@section Install OS packages

@example
sudo apt update
sudo apt install -y \
    openjdk-21-jdk-headless \
    postgresql-16 postgresql-16-pgvector \
    git curl ca-certificates \
    s3fs \
    openssl
@end example

Verify:

@example
java -version          # 21.x
psql --version         # 16.x
@end example

The @code{postgresql-16-pgvector} apt package provides the
@code{vector} extension.  @code{pg_trgm} ships with PostgreSQL itself.

@node Create the ownsona user
@section Create the ownsona user

This user owns Tomcat, the source tree, and the running JVM.

@example
sudo adduser --disabled-password --gecos '' ownsona
sudo -iu ownsona
@end example

Most of the rest of this chapter assumes you are @code{ownsona} unless
a command starts with @code{sudo}.

@node PostgreSQL with pgvector
@section PostgreSQL with pgvector
@cindex PostgreSQL
@cindex pgvector

The Ubuntu package starts and enables PostgreSQL automatically:

@example
sudo systemctl status postgresql
@end example

Create the application databases:

@example
sudo -u postgres createdb ownsona
sudo -u postgres createdb ownsona_test     # used by sql/run_tests.sh
@end example

Create the application role and run the schema migration.  The
repository ships a one-shot setup script; pass it the password you
want the application to use:

@example
PGPW="$(openssl rand -base64 24 | tr -d '/+=' | head -c 32)"
echo "Save this somewhere safe: $PGPW"

cd /home/ownsona/ownsona     # see step 'Clone and build' if not yet cloned
sql/setup_db.sh "$PGPW"
@end example

The script:

@itemize @bullet
@item creates the @code{ownsona} PostgreSQL role with the supplied
password;
@item runs @file{sql/001_init.sql} against the @code{ownsona} database
(creates the @code{vector} and @code{pg_trgm} extensions, the
@code{memories} table, all indexes including the HNSW vector index,
the duplicate-prevention partial unique index, and the
@code{updated_at} trigger);
@item grants the @code{ownsona} role the table and sequence privileges
it needs plus @code{CREATE ON SCHEMA public} and ownership of
@code{memories} (and its sequence).  The auto-migrator
(@pxref{Upgrading an existing install}) needs these to create its
@code{db_version} bookkeeping table and apply future migrations
without requiring the postgres superuser at runtime.
@end itemize

Run the migration against the test database too:

@example
sudo -u postgres psql -d ownsona_test -f sql/001_init.sql
@end example

You will use @code{$PGPW} again in @ref{Configure application.ini}.

@node Apache Tomcat 11
@section Apache Tomcat 11
@cindex Tomcat

@subsection Download and extract

Pick the latest Tomcat 11.0.x from @uref{https://tomcat.apache.org/}.
As @code{ownsona}:

@example
cd /home/ownsona
curl -L -O https://dlcdn.apache.org/tomcat/tomcat-11/v11.0.X/bin/apache-tomcat-11.0.X.tar.gz
tar xf apache-tomcat-11.0.X.tar.gz
mv apache-tomcat-11.0.X tomcat
rm apache-tomcat-11.0.X.tar.gz
@end example

@subsection Heap settings (@file{tomcat/bin/setenv.sh})

The heap defaults shipped with Tomcat are too aggressive for a 2 GB
VM.  Create or edit @file{/home/ownsona/tomcat/bin/setenv.sh}:

@example
#!/bin/sh
# Heap sized for a 2 GB VM. Larger boxes can raise -Xmx.
export CATALINA_OPTS="-Xms256M -Xmx768M -Djava.awt.headless=true \
    -XX:+UseG1GC -XX:+DisableExplicitGC \
    -Djava.library.path=/usr/local/apr/lib"
@end example

Application secrets and URLs go in @file{application.ini} ---
@pxref{Configure application.ini}.  Don't put them in
@file{setenv.sh}.

@example
chmod +x /home/ownsona/tomcat/bin/setenv.sh
@end example

@subsection Configure HTTPS and autoDeploy in @file{server.xml}

Edit @file{/home/ownsona/tomcat/conf/server.xml} and make four changes:

@enumerate
@item @b{HTTP connector on port 80} (Tomcat defaults to 8080):

@example
<Connector port="80" protocol="HTTP/1.1"
           connectionTimeout="20000"
           redirectPort="443" />
@end example

@item @b{HTTPS connector on port 443}, with one or more
@code{SSLHostConfig} blocks:

@example
<Connector port="443" protocol="org.apache.coyote.http11.Http11NioProtocol"
           maxThreads="150" SSLEnabled="true">
    <UpgradeProtocol className="org.apache.coyote.http2.Http2Protocol" />
    <SSLHostConfig hostName="ownsona.example.com">
        <Certificate certificateKeystoreFile="conf/tomcat.p12"
                     certificateKeystoreType="PKCS12"
                     certificateKeystorePassword="<keystore-pw>"
                     type="RSA" />
    </SSLHostConfig>
</Connector>
@end example

@item @b{@code{<Host>} element with autoDeploy and unpackWARs}:

@example
<Host name="localhost" appBase="webapps"
      unpackWARs="true" autoDeploy="true">
@end example

Both must be @code{true}.  With @code{unpackWARs="false"} the Kiss
webapp NPEs at startup because @code{ServletContext.getRealPath("/")}
returns null.

@item @b{@code{AccessLogValve} with retention}:

@example
<Valve className="org.apache.catalina.valves.AccessLogValve" directory="logs"
       prefix="localhost_access_log" suffix=".txt"
       pattern="%h %l %u %t &quot;%r&quot; %s %b"
       maxDays="90" />
@end example

Without @code{maxDays}, daily access log files accumulate forever.
@end enumerate

@subsection Permissions

@example
sudo chown -R ownsona:ownsona /home/ownsona/tomcat
@end example

@node TLS certificates
@section TLS certificates
@cindex TLS
@cindex HTTPS
@cindex Let's Encrypt

Tomcat reads PKCS12 keystores.  The simplest production path is Let's
Encrypt via @code{certbot}, then a one-time conversion:

@example
sudo apt install -y certbot
sudo certbot certonly --standalone -d <your-host>
# certbot writes /etc/letsencrypt/live/<your-host>/@{fullchain,privkey@}.pem

sudo openssl pkcs12 -export \
    -in    /etc/letsencrypt/live/<your-host>/fullchain.pem \
    -inkey /etc/letsencrypt/live/<your-host>/privkey.pem \
    -out   /home/ownsona/tomcat/conf/tomcat.p12 \
    -name  tomcat \
    -password pass:<keystore-pw>

sudo chown ownsona:ownsona /home/ownsona/tomcat/conf/tomcat.p12
sudo chmod 600 /home/ownsona/tomcat/conf/tomcat.p12
@end example

Use the same @code{<keystore-pw>} you put in the
@code{SSLHostConfig} block above.

Set up a renewal hook so each renewal regenerates the keystore and
restarts Tomcat.  Example at
@file{/etc/letsencrypt/renewal-hooks/deploy/ownsona-tomcat}:

@example
#!/bin/sh
set -e
openssl pkcs12 -export \
    -in    "$RENEWED_LINEAGE/fullchain.pem" \
    -inkey "$RENEWED_LINEAGE/privkey.pem" \
    -out   /home/ownsona/tomcat/conf/tomcat.p12 \
    -name  tomcat \
    -password pass:<keystore-pw>
chown ownsona:ownsona /home/ownsona/tomcat/conf/tomcat.p12
chmod 600             /home/ownsona/tomcat/conf/tomcat.p12
systemctl restart ownsona.service
@end example

@example
sudo chmod +x /etc/letsencrypt/renewal-hooks/deploy/ownsona-tomcat
@end example

@node Clone and build
@section Clone and build

As @code{ownsona}:

@example
cd /home/ownsona
git clone <git-url-of-ownsona-repo> ownsona
cd ownsona
./bld -v build       # compiles core + precompiled into work/exploded/
./bld war            # produces work/Kiss.war
@end example

The build also writes a copy of the WAR to @file{tomcat/webapps/ROOT.war}
inside the @emph{repo's} local Tomcat directory
(@file{ownsona/tomcat/}), which is a dev convenience and not used in
production.  Production deploys come from @file{work/Kiss.war}.

@node Apply the database migration
@section Apply the database migration

If you ran @file{sql/setup_db.sh} during @ref{PostgreSQL with pgvector}
you are already done.  Otherwise:

@example
cd /home/ownsona/ownsona
sql/setup_db.sh "$PGPW"
sudo -u postgres psql -d ownsona_test -f sql/001_init.sql
@end example

Confirm:

@example
sudo -u postgres psql -d ownsona -c "\\dt"
sudo -u postgres psql -d ownsona -c "SELECT extname FROM pg_extension ORDER BY extname;"
@end example

You should see the @code{memories} table and the @code{pg_trgm},
@code{plpgsql}, and @code{vector} extensions.

@node Configure application.ini
@section Configure @file{application.ini}
@cindex application.ini

All application settings --- secrets, URLs, DB credentials, tunables ---
live in @file{src/main/backend/application.ini}.  The @code{bld} build
copies this file into the WAR (@file{work/exploded/WEB-INF/backend/}) on
every build; the servlet reads it once at load via
@code{MainServlet.getEnvironment()}.  Edit the source-tree copy, then
rebuild and redeploy.

The repo ships @file{application.ini.example} (a redacted template)
and gitignores @file{application.ini} itself, so your live secrets
never end up in commits.  First-time setup is a copy + edit:

@example
cp src/main/backend/application.ini.example src/main/backend/application.ini
$EDITOR src/main/backend/application.ini
@end example

Required:

@example
[main]

DatabaseType     = PostgreSQL
DatabaseHost     = localhost
DatabasePort     = 5432
DatabaseName     = ownsona
DatabaseUser     = ownsona
DatabasePassword = <PGPW>

EMBEDDING_API_KEY    = sk-...your-OpenAI-key...
OWNSONA_API_TOKEN    = <openssl rand -hex 32>
EMBEDDING_ENDPOINT   = https://api.openai.com/v1/embeddings
EMBEDDING_MODEL      = text-embedding-3-small
EMBEDDING_DIMENSIONS = 1536
@end example

Generate the bearer token with @code{openssl rand -hex 32} and save it
somewhere safe --- it's what every MCP client must present in
@code{Authorization: Bearer ...}.

@code{EMBEDDING_DIMENSIONS} must match the @code{vector(N)} column
type in @file{sql/001_init.sql}.  The shipped schema uses
@code{vector(1536)}, which matches @code{text-embedding-3-small}.

Optional keys with defaults are documented in @ref{Configuration}.

@node Install the systemd service
@section Install the systemd service
@cindex systemd
@cindex ownsona.service

Deploy the production WAR and install the unit.  As @code{ownsona}:

@example
cp /home/ownsona/ownsona/work/Kiss.war /home/ownsona/tomcat/webapps/ROOT.war
@end example

Then as root:

@example
sudo /home/ownsona/ownsona/sql/install_systemd.sh
@end example

The script:

@itemize @bullet
@item stops any manually-launched Tomcat;
@item removes the stale @file{/etc/systemd/system/tomcat.service} if
present;
@item installs @file{/etc/systemd/system/ownsona.service} from
@file{sql/ownsona.service};
@item runs @code{daemon-reload}, then @code{enable --now}s the unit.
@end itemize

The unit runs @code{catalina.sh run} as the @code{ownsona} user with
@code{AmbientCapabilities=CAP_NET_BIND_SERVICE}.  That capability is
granted by @code{systemd} at exec time, which means @b{apt-upgrading
openjdk does not break port-binding} --- unlike the older @code{setcap}
path, where every JDK upgrade silently strips
@code{cap_net_bind_service} from the binary.

@node Smoke test the install
@section Smoke test

A single MCP @code{initialize} call:

@example
curl -sS -X POST https://<your-host>/mcp \
    -H "Authorization: Bearer $OWNSONA_API_TOKEN" \
    -H "Content-Type: application/json" \
    -d '@{"jsonrpc":"2.0","id":1,"method":"initialize","params":@{@}@}'
@end example

Expected:

@example
@{"result":@{"capabilities":@{"tools":@{"listChanged":false@}@},
 "serverInfo":@{"name":"ownsona-mcp","version":"1.0.0"@},
 "protocolVersion":"2025-06-18"@},"id":1,"jsonrpc":"2.0"@}
@end example

A 401 means the bearer token is wrong.  A connection refused/reset
generally means Tomcat failed to bind 443 --- check
@code{journalctl -u ownsona.service}.

End-to-end exercise of every tool:

@example
OWNSONA_API_TOKEN="..." /home/ownsona/ownsona/sql/smoke_test.sh
@end example

Run the test suite:

@example
sql/run_tests.sh                                          # unit only
OWNSONA_TEST_DATABASE_URL="postgresql://ownsona:$PGPW@@localhost:5432/ownsona_test" \
    sql/run_tests.sh                                      # also integration
@end example

@node Daily backups
@section Daily backups
@cindex backups
@cindex s3fs

Backups go to an S3 bucket mounted at @file{/mnt/backups} via
@code{s3fs}, triggered by a @code{systemd} timer at 03:00 daily.  Two
files per day:

@itemize @bullet
@item @code{files-YYYY-MM-DD.tar.gz} --- @file{/home}, @file{/root},
@file{/etc}, @file{/usr/local}, @file{/opt}, @file{/var/spool/cron},
plus a @file{/var/lib/ownsona-backup/} metadata bundle (package list,
crontabs, enabled units, OS info).
@item @code{database-YYYY-MM-DD.gz} --- @code{pg_dumpall} output (every
database @b{and} global state: roles, passwords, GRANTs, tablespaces).
@end itemize

Retention: every backup @leq{} 30 days old, plus the last day of every
month forever.

@subsection Configure @code{s3fs}

Create an IAM user with
@code{s3:GetObject}/@code{s3:PutObject}/@code{s3:ListBucket} on the
bucket.  Store its credentials in @file{/etc/passwd-s3fs}:

@example
echo "<bucket>:<KEY>:<SECRET>" | sudo tee /etc/passwd-s3fs
sudo chmod 600 /etc/passwd-s3fs

sudo mkdir -p /mnt/backups
@end example

@file{/etc/mount-s3fs} (root-owned, mode 0700) is a wrapper that mounts
the bucket if it isn't already mounted:

@example
#!/bin/sh
mountpoint -q /mnt/backups || \
    /usr/bin/s3fs <bucket> /mnt/backups \
        -o passwd_file=/etc/passwd-s3fs \
        -o allow_other \
        -o use_path_request_style
@end example

@example
sudo chmod 700 /etc/mount-s3fs
sudo /etc/mount-s3fs
mountpoint /mnt/backups        # should print "is a mountpoint"
@end example

@subsection Install the backup timer

@example
sudo /home/ownsona/ownsona/sql/install_backup.sh
@end example

The installer copies @file{sql/ownsona-backup.sh} to
@file{/usr/local/sbin/}, installs
@file{ownsona-backup.@{service,timer@}} under
@file{/etc/systemd/system/}, and @code{enable --now}s the timer.

Run one immediately:

@example
sudo systemctl start ownsona-backup.service
sudo tail -f /var/log/ownsona-backup.log
sudo ls -lh /mnt/backups/
@end example

@node Restore from backup
@section Restore from backup
@cindex restore
@cindex disaster recovery

If you have a recent backup, this path is @b{faster} than installing
from scratch.

@enumerate
@item Provision a fresh Ubuntu 24.04 host.

@item Install just enough packages to extract and restore:

@example
sudo apt update
sudo apt install -y openjdk-21-jdk-headless \
    postgresql-16 postgresql-16-pgvector \
    s3fs gzip tar
@end example

@item Mount the backup bucket.  You will need the AWS credentials by
other means (password manager, etc.) since @file{/etc/passwd-s3fs} is
itself inside the backup:

@example
sudo mkdir -p /mnt/backups
echo "<bucket>:<KEY>:<SECRET>" | sudo tee /etc/passwd-s3fs
sudo chmod 600 /etc/passwd-s3fs
sudo s3fs <bucket> /mnt/backups -o passwd_file=/etc/passwd-s3fs \
    -o allow_other -o use_path_request_style
@end example

@item @i{(optional)} Reinstall previously-managed apt packages:

@example
sudo tar -xzf /mnt/backups/files-YYYY-MM-DD.tar.gz -C /tmp \
    var/lib/ownsona-backup/apt-mark-manual.txt
xargs -a /tmp/var/lib/ownsona-backup/apt-mark-manual.txt sudo apt install -y
@end example

@item Extract the file backup over the root filesystem:

@example
sudo tar -xzpf /mnt/backups/files-YYYY-MM-DD.tar.gz -C /
@end example

This restores @file{/home}, @file{/root}, @file{/etc},
@file{/usr/local}, @file{/opt}, the per-user crontabs in
@file{/var/spool/cron}, the live systemd units, and the metadata
bundle.

@item Restore PostgreSQL (drops and recreates everything):

@example
zcat /mnt/backups/database-YYYY-MM-DD.gz | sudo -u postgres psql -X postgres
@end example

@item Reload systemd and bring services up:

@example
sudo systemctl daemon-reload
sudo systemctl enable --now ownsona.service
sudo systemctl enable --now ownsona-backup.timer
@end example

@item Smoke test (@pxref{Smoke test the install}).
@end enumerate

The OS-level @code{ownsona} Linux user is restored along with
@file{/home/ownsona}, so no manual @code{adduser} is needed.
PostgreSQL roles (including the @code{ownsona} role and its password
hash) are restored by @code{pg_dumpall}.

@node Upgrading an existing install
@section Upgrading an existing install
@cindex upgrade
@cindex auto-migration
@cindex migrator_prep.sql

If your OwnSona database was created BEFORE the auto-migration
framework landed (rollout Phase 2), you need a one-time privilege
fixup before deploying any release that includes the auto-migrator.
Fresh installs done via @file{sql/setup_db.sh} already include this ---
skip the prep if you ran @file{setup_db.sh} against a clean database
after Phase 2 shipped.

@subsection One-time prep before the first auto-migrator deploy

The auto-migrator starts up by creating a @code{db_version}
bookkeeping table and, in later phases, by @code{ALTER TABLE}-ing
@code{memories}.  Neither works with only the original grants from
@file{sql/001_init.sql}.  Apply the additional privileges once:

@example
# /root cannot be read by the postgres user, so pipe via stdin
cat sql/migrator_prep.sql | sudo -u postgres psql -d ownsona
@end example

The script:

@itemize @bullet
@item @code{GRANT CREATE ON SCHEMA public TO ownsona;}
@item @code{ALTER TABLE memories OWNER TO ownsona;} (and its sequence)
@item prints a verification block showing @code{can_create_in_public = t}
and @code{memories_owner = ownsona}.  If you don't see those, the
grants didn't apply.
@end itemize

The script is idempotent --- safe to re-run.

@subsection Deploying the new WAR

After the prep runs (or if it was already in place), upgrade deploys
follow the normal ``build @result{} swap WAR @result{} restart Tomcat''
pattern documented in @file{OwnSona-rollout-plan.md}.  The
auto-migrator runs at servlet load and brings the database up to
whatever @code{CURRENT_DB_VERSION} the new WAR is built against; you
can verify in @code{journalctl -u ownsona.service}:

@example
... migrator: db_version baseline established (version=1)
... migrator: applied v=2 name="add record_version column" ms=...
... record_migrator: done upgraded=0 failed=0
@end example

If the migrator fails (typically: permission errors or a registry
mismatch), the servlet refuses to load and the failure shows in the
journal.  Fix the underlying issue and redeploy --- the database is in
its pre-migration state because each migration runs in its own
transaction.

@subsection Rollback

Roll back the WAR by restoring the previous @file{Kiss.war}.
Migrations in the rollout plan are strictly additive, so the older
code simply ignores the newer columns.  If you also want to remove
newly-created columns or the @code{db_version} row that recorded a
specific migration, run the rollback SQL listed in the corresponding
phase's ship checklist in @file{OwnSona-rollout-plan.md}.

@node Operational reference
@section Operational reference

@subsection Service control

@example
sudo systemctl status   ownsona.service
sudo systemctl restart  ownsona.service     # required after any application.ini change
sudo systemctl stop     ownsona.service
sudo systemctl start    ownsona.service
journalctl -u ownsona.service -f             # live application + Tomcat logs
@end example

@subsection Code change @result{} deploy

@example
cd /home/ownsona/ownsona
./bld -v build && ./bld war
cp work/Kiss.war /home/ownsona/tomcat/webapps/ROOT.war
# autoDeploy redeploys in ~10 s; no service restart needed for code changes.
@end example

@file{application.ini} is read once at servlet load, so editing it
requires a fresh build (so the new ini lands in the WAR) followed by
redeploy or service restart.

@subsection Backup control

@example
sudo systemctl list-timers ownsona-backup.timer       # next run
sudo systemctl start ownsona-backup.service           # one-shot now
sudo tail -f /var/log/ownsona-backup.log              # last run + history
@end example

@subsection Log retention summary

@multitable @columnfractions .42 .25 .33
@headitem Log path @tab Rotated by @tab Retention
@item Application stdout (log4j2 console) @tab journald @tab journald defaults (~4 GiB)
@item @file{tomcat/logs/catalina.YYYY-MM-DD.log} @tab Tomcat juli @tab @code{maxDays=90}
@item @file{tomcat/logs/localhost_access_log.YYYY-MM-DD.txt} @tab @code{AccessLogValve} @tab @code{maxDays=90}
@item @file{tomcat/logs/catalina.out} @tab n/a @tab unused under systemd
@end multitable

@subsection Rotating the bearer token

Generate a new token, update @code{OWNSONA_API_TOKEN} in
@file{src/main/backend/application.ini}, run @code{./bld -v build
&& ./bld war} to rebuild the WAR, redeploy, and distribute the new
token to MCP clients.  There is no dual-token grace window; clients
see a 401 until they update.

@subsection Top common failure modes

@itemize @bullet
@item @code{journalctl -u ownsona.service} shows
@code{BindException: Permission denied}: the service couldn't bind
80/443.  @code{systemd}'s @code{AmbientCapabilities} is missing from
@file{ownsona.service}, or the service's @code{User=} was changed and
the override no longer applies.

@item MCP returns @code{EMBEDDING_ERROR} with @code{insufficient_quota}:
the OpenAI account is out of credit.  Top up; auth, DB, listing, and
text search keep working.

@item MCP returns @code{AUTH_FAILED} on every request:
@code{OWNSONA_API_TOKEN} doesn't match what the client is sending, or
the WAR wasn't rebuilt/redeployed after editing the ini.

@item First request after deploy is slow / 404: Tomcat is still
redeploying the WAR; ~10 s window with @code{autoDeploy="true"}.
@end itemize
