@node Introduction
@chapter Introduction
@cindex introduction
@cindex overview

@cindex MCP
@cindex Model Context Protocol
OwnSona is a single-user, self-hosted memory server.  It stores durable
facts about you in a PostgreSQL database and exposes them over the
@uref{https://modelcontextprotocol.io, Model Context Protocol (MCP)} so
that any MCP-capable large-language-model client --- Claude (Anthropic),
ChatGPT (OpenAI), Gemini (Google), Grok (xAI), and an ever-growing list
of others --- can read from and write to the same store.

The name is a contraction of @emph{own persona}.  The store is your
persona, the part of yourself you teach once and never have to teach
again.

@menu
* The problem::                  Per-provider amnesia.
* The pitch::                    One memory, every LLM.
* What's inside::                Tech stack at a glance.
* Design principles::            Choices the project makes deliberately.
* Status and scope::             What's done, what's deliberately out of scope.
@end menu

@node The problem
@section The problem

Today, teaching an LLM anything durable about yourself is a
per-provider chore.  You explain who you are to ChatGPT, then again to
Claude, then again to Gemini.  Each one forgets between conversations.
Switching providers, switching models, even upgrading to a newer
release of the same provider can dump everything you've ever taught it.

A handful of vendor-specific workarounds exist --- ChatGPT's
``Memory,'' Claude's project files, Gemini's gems --- but none of them
are portable.  Your memory of yourself is locked inside whichever
vendor you happened to teach.  If a competitor launches a better model
next year, the cost of switching includes re-teaching the new one
everything.

@node The pitch
@section The pitch

OwnSona breaks the cycle by being the durable memory store every
MCP-capable LLM connects to.

@itemize @bullet
@item
Tell Claude once that your dog's name is Mochi, that you prefer concise
answers, that the quarterly forecast lives in @file{~/work/q3/}, or
that you're a Go developer learning React --- and the next session in
ChatGPT or Gemini already knows.

@item
A fact written by one model is recallable by the next.  Your context
follows you across providers, across models, across years.

@item
You own the database.  It lives on a server you control.  Nothing
about your memory store leaves your machine except the embedding API
calls that vectorize new facts (and even those go to a configurable
endpoint, including self-hosted models).
@end itemize

The mechanism is unspectacular: MCP standardizes tool-calling for
LLMs, OwnSona implements seven tools, and any LLM client that speaks
MCP can call them.  Under the hood, memories are stored in PostgreSQL
with the @code{pgvector} extension; recall is vector-similarity search
over OpenAI's @code{text-embedding-3-small} model by default
(swappable).

@node What's inside
@section What's inside
@cindex tech stack
@cindex architecture

@itemize @bullet
@item
@b{Backend:} Java 17+, built on the
@uref{https://kissweb.org, Kiss web development framework}.  Kiss is
an open-source Java full-stack framework; OwnSona uses its servlet
container, JSON-RPC plumbing, c3p0 connection pool, @code{bld} build
script, and the @code{MCPServerBase} base class this server extends.
Documentation for Kiss itself --- manual, JSDoc, JavaDoc, training
videos --- lives at @uref{https://kissweb.org}; the source is at
@uref{https://github.com/blakemcbride/Kiss}.  Runs as a single
servlet under Apache Tomcat 11 (embedded).

@item
@b{Storage:} PostgreSQL 16 with the @code{pgvector} extension for
similarity search and @code{pg_trgm} for fuzzy text matching.

@item
@b{Embeddings:} OpenAI's @code{text-embedding-3-small} (1536-dim) by
default, exposed through a swappable @code{EmbeddingProvider}
interface.  Self-hosted alternatives (Ollama, sentence-transformers)
work without changing any application code.

@item
@b{Auth:} OAuth 2.1 (auth code + PKCE).  Every @code{/mcp} request
must present an @code{Authorization: Bearer @var{JWT}} access token
issued by the embedded authorization server.  MCP clients discover
the AS via @code{/.well-known/oauth-protected-resource} and register
themselves dynamically (RFC 7591); the user logs in once via a
browser tab the client opens.  The secret-scanner refuses to store
text that looks like an API key, JWT, or PEM private key.

@item
@b{Transport:} HTTPS on port 443, terminated by Tomcat directly.

@item
@b{Supervision:} systemd, with a nightly @code{pg_dump} backup unit.
@end itemize

@node Design principles
@section Design principles

A few choices that have shaped every other choice:

@table @asis
@item Single user.
The store has @b{one} user (you).  There are no multi-tenant primitives
to design around.  When the design has to choose between flexibility
and simplicity, it picks simplicity.

@item Vendor neutrality on the server side.
The only place a vendor name appears in the request or write path is
the @code{EmbeddingProvider} implementation.  MCP tool descriptions
are generic: they say ``the calling LLM,'' not ``Claude.''  Adding a
new provider is one class plus an @file{application.ini} switch.

@item Additive schema migrations only.
The auto-migration framework will refuse to drop, rename, or rewrite
existing data.  Schema changes add columns or indexes.  Destructive
operations (column resizes for an embedding dim change, for example)
are deliberate, narrow exceptions covered in @ref{Embedding Migration}.

@item Code is cheap, data is precious.
A WAR swap can be rolled back in seconds.  Restoring a database from
backup costs you every memory written between the backup and the
rollback.  Every operational procedure in this manual is built around
that asymmetry: take the backup first, change the data carefully,
keep the rollback path short.

@item No admin operations in the MCP surface.
The MCP tools any LLM can call are deliberately read/write-of-facts
only.  Migration triggers, re-embedding, log inspection, schema
fiddling --- all of those are operator actions, performed by editing
@file{application.ini} and restarting, or by running SQL directly.
This makes it impossible for an LLM with a leaked access token to
cause structural damage to the store.
@end table

@node Status and scope
@section Status and scope

OwnSona is in active use as the author's personal memory store.  The
core feature set is stable.  See @file{OwnSona-rollout-plan.md} in the
source tree for the per-phase implementation status.

Deliberately out of scope:

@itemize @bullet
@item @b{Multi-user tenancy.}  Not coming.
@item @b{Hosted SaaS.}  Not coming.  Run your own.
@item @b{Generative-LLM calls in the server's request path.}  Not coming;
guardrail #1.  The CLI's @code{teach} subcommand uses an LLM to extract
facts from prose, but that's client-side and the server doesn't know.
@end itemize
