@node MCP Tools
@chapter MCP Tools
@cindex MCP tools
@cindex tools

OwnSona exposes its functionality as a set of MCP tools.  Each one is
a JSON-RPC method on the @code{/mcp} endpoint, callable by any MCP
client that presents a valid OAuth 2.1 access token.  This chapter
is the reference for every tool's inputs, outputs, errors, and
example calls.

@menu
* General tool conventions::     Inputs, outputs, errors, IDs, timestamps.
* The remember tool::            Store a new fact.
* The remember_batch tool::      Bulk-load up to 200 facts in one call.
* The recall tool::              Vector-similarity search.
* The search_memory tool::       Alias of recall for clients that prefer verbs.
* The build_context_prompt tool:: Pack relevant facts into a prompt envelope.
* The list_memories tool::       Paginated listing with cleanup filters.
* The update_memory tool::       Edit an existing memory.
* The update_memory_batch tool:: Edit up to 200 memories in one call.
* The confirm tool::             Refresh last_confirmed_at.
* The forget tool::              Soft-delete or hard-delete a memory.
* The forget_batch tool::        Soft-delete up to 200 memories in one call.
* The find_near_duplicates tool:: Cluster active memories by cosine similarity.
* The text_search tool::         Plain-substring search.
* The get_memory tool::          Fetch a single memory by id.
* The count_memories tool::      Cheap COUNT with optional filters.
* The memory_stats tool::        Aggregate counts and top tags.
* The list_tags tool::           Distinct tags with their counts.
* The export_memories tool::     Full JSON dump for backup.
* Error codes::                  The full error vocabulary.
@end menu

@node General tool conventions
@section General tool conventions
@cindex JSON-RPC
@cindex tool envelope

All tool calls are JSON-RPC 2.0 over HTTPS POST to @code{/mcp}:

@example
POST /mcp HTTP/1.1
Authorization: Bearer <OAuth-2.1-access-token>
Content-Type: application/json

@{
  "jsonrpc": "2.0",
  "id": 1,
  "method": "tools/call",
  "params": @{
    "name": "<tool-name>",
    "arguments": @{ ... @}
  @}
@}
@end example

The server returns a JSON-RPC response whose @code{result.content[0].text}
field holds the tool's structured payload as a JSON string.  Every
successful payload begins with @code{"ok": true}; every error payload
begins with @code{"ok": false, "error": @{...@}}.

@subsection Common types

@table @asis
@item Memory ID
A 64-bit integer (Postgres @code{BIGSERIAL}).  Stable for the row's
lifetime; never reused after a hard-delete.

@item Timestamps
ISO 8601 with timezone, e.g.@: @code{"2026-05-17T14:00:00Z"}.

@item Tags
Lowercase short strings, alphanumeric plus hyphen.  See
@ref{Tag normalization}.

@item Vectors
Never returned in tool output; an implementation detail of the
similarity search.
@end table

@subsection Authentication

Every request must carry @code{Authorization: Bearer @var{JWT}},
where @var{JWT} is an OAuth 2.1 access token issued by OwnSona's
embedded authorization server.  The resource-server side validates
the token's signature against the AS's JWKS, plus the @code{iss},
@code{aud}, @code{exp}, and (if configured) required scopes.

Missing, malformed, expired, or wrong-signature tokens return HTTP
401 with an RFC 6750 / RFC 9728 @code{WWW-Authenticate} header
naming the resource-metadata document at
@code{/.well-known/oauth-protected-resource}.  MCP clients use that
header to (re-)discover the AS and refresh their token.

MCP clients normally obtain a token by the auth-code + PKCE flow:
the client discovers the AS via the well-known metadata documents,
registers itself dynamically at @code{/oauth/register} (RFC 7591),
sends the user to @code{/oauth/authorize} (where they log in with
@code{OWNSONA_LOGIN_USERNAME} / @code{OWNSONA_LOGIN_PASSWORD} and
click @b{Allow}), and exchanges the resulting code at
@code{/oauth/token} for an access token and refresh token.  Refresh
tokens are rotated on each use, with stolen-token detection per
RFC 6749bis.

@node The remember tool
@section The @code{remember} tool
@cindex remember

Stores a single durable fact.

@subsection Inputs

@table @code
@item text
@b{Required string.}  The fact to remember.  Up to @code{MAX_TEXT_CHARS}
characters (default 16000).  Texts shaped like secrets (API keys, JWTs,
PEM private-key markers) are rejected with @code{SECRET_REJECTED}.

@item tags
Array of strings.  Optional.  Normalized to lowercase canonical forms
(see @ref{Tag normalization}).

@item source_provider
String.  Optional.  Name of the LLM or client that produced this
memory.  Useful for auditing.

@item importance
Number, 0--1.  Optional, default 0.5.  Reserved for future ranking
work; currently stored but not used in recall scoring.

@item capture_mode
String.  Optional.  Either @code{"explicit"} (user explicitly asked to
remember) or @code{"inferred"} (LLM decided on its own).  Recorded as
provenance.

@item session_id
String.  Optional.  Opaque conversation identifier.  Stored as-is.

@item dedup_policy
String.  Optional.  One of @code{"insert"} (skip the semantic-dedup
check), @code{"skip_if_near"} (return the existing id if a
near-duplicate is found), or @code{"ask"} (default: insert anyway, but
include the near-duplicates in the response).

@item expires_at
ISO 8601 timestamp.  Optional.  Recall excludes this memory after the
date passes.  Useful for time-limited facts.

@item last_confirmed_at
ISO 8601 timestamp.  Optional.  When this fact was last verified as
still true.  Defaults to @code{now()} on insert.
@end table

@subsection Output

@example
@{
  "ok": true,
  "memory_id": 123,
  "message": "Ok",
  "near_duplicates": [...],         // present if dedup_policy = "ask"
  "previously_corrected": [...]     // present if any tombstones nearby
@}
@end example

If the request was rejected for being a near-duplicate
(@code{dedup_policy = "skip_if_near"}), the existing memory's id is
returned:

@example
@{
  "ok": true,
  "memory_id": 99,
  "message": "Already remembered",
  "near_duplicates": [...]
@}
@end example

@subsection Errors

@code{INVALID_INPUT}, @code{SECRET_REJECTED}, @code{EMBEDDING_ERROR},
@code{DATABASE_ERROR}.

@subsection Example

@example
@{
  "name": "remember",
  "arguments": @{
    "text": "My son Colby lives in Los Angeles.",
    "tags": ["family"],
    "capture_mode": "explicit"
  @}
@}
@end example

@node The remember_batch tool
@section The @code{remember_batch} tool
@cindex remember_batch
@cindex bulk import

Stores up to @code{MAX_BATCH_SIZE} (default 200) memories in a single
call.  The embedding provider is invoked @b{once} for the whole batch,
making this dramatically faster than calling @code{remember} 200
times.

@subsection Inputs

@table @code
@item items
@b{Required array.}  Each item has the same shape as a @code{remember}
argument: @code{text} required, plus optional @code{tags},
@code{source_provider}, @code{importance}, @code{capture_mode},
@code{session_id}, @code{dedup_policy}, @code{expires_at},
@code{last_confirmed_at}.

@item source_provider
String.  Optional default applied to items that don't specify their
own.

@item dedup_policy
String.  Optional default policy applied to items that don't specify
their own.  Default @code{"ask"}.
@end table

@subsection Output

@example
@{
  "ok": true,
  "results": [
    @{ "ok": true,  "memory_id": 200, "message": "Ok" @},
    @{ "ok": true,  "memory_id": 201, "message": "Ok" @},
    @{ "ok": false, "error": @{ "code": "SECRET_REJECTED", ... @} @}
  ],
  "summary": @{
    "total": 3,
    "succeeded": 2,
    "failed": 1
  @}
@}
@end example

Per-item failures do @b{not} fail the batch.  Each item's outcome
lands in its own slot in @code{results}.

@subsection Errors

Batch-level: @code{INVALID_INPUT} (e.g.@: @code{items} not an array,
or exceeds @code{MAX_BATCH_SIZE}), @code{EMBEDDING_ERROR}.  Per-item
errors appear inside @code{results}.

@node The recall tool
@section The @code{recall} tool
@cindex recall
@cindex vector search

Finds memories semantically similar to a query, ordered by cosine
similarity.

@subsection Inputs

@table @code
@item query
@b{Required string.}  The natural-language question or topic to search
for.

@item limit
Integer.  Optional, default @code{DEFAULT_RECALL_LIMIT} (8), capped at
@code{MAX_RECALL_LIMIT} (50).

@item min_score
Number, 0--1.  Optional.  Filter out matches below this score.

@item tags
Array of strings.  Optional.  Filter to memories with at least one
matching tag.
@end table

@subsection Output

@example
@{
  "ok": true,
  "matches": [
    @{
      "id": 123,
      "text": "The user's son Colby lives in Los Angeles.",
      "score": 0.8421,
      "created_at": "2026-05-05T12:00:00Z",
      "updated_at": "2026-05-05T12:00:00Z",
      "last_confirmed_at": "2026-05-05T12:00:00Z",
      "tags": ["family"],
      "source_provider": "openai",
      "capture_mode": "explicit"
    @},
    ...
  ]
@}
@end example

The tool description instructs the calling LLM to @b{prefer the most
recently confirmed match} when multiple results look contradictory:
compare @code{last_confirmed_at} first, then @code{updated_at}, then
@code{created_at}.

@subsection Errors

@code{INVALID_INPUT}, @code{EMBEDDING_ERROR}, @code{DATABASE_ERROR}.

@subsection Example

@example
@{
  "name": "recall",
  "arguments": @{
    "query": "where does my son live",
    "limit": 5,
    "tags": ["family"]
  @}
@}
@end example

@node The search_memory tool
@section The @code{search_memory} tool
@cindex search_memory
@cindex recall alias

Alias of @code{recall} with identical inputs, outputs, and errors.
Exists because some MCP-client harnesses (notably Claude's
deferred-tool-loading keyword ranker) fail to surface a tool named
@code{recall} from a generic search query and pick the wrong
fallback.  Registering the same tool under a more verb-led name
gives those harnesses a discoverable handle.  Both names dispatch to
the same handler.

@node The build_context_prompt tool
@section The @code{build_context_prompt} tool
@cindex build_context_prompt
@cindex prompt envelope

Returns a fully assembled prompt with relevant facts in a fixed
envelope, suitable for piping into a non-MCP LLM.

@subsection Inputs

@table @code
@item user_prompt
@b{Required string.}  The user's actual question.

@item limit
Integer.  Optional.  Number of facts to include.  Default 8.

@item max_chars
Integer.  Optional.  Hard cap on the total prompt size in characters.
The tool greedy-packs the highest-scoring facts that fit, stopping
when adding the next would exceed @code{max_chars}.  At least one
fact is always included if any matched.

@item min_score
Number, 0--1.  Optional.  Lower bound on similarity for included
facts.

@item tags
Array of strings.  Optional.  Tag filter, same semantics as
@code{recall}.
@end table

@subsection Output

@example
@{
  "ok": true,
  "prompt": "The following are previously known facts:\\n\\n[fact 1]\\n\\n[fact 2]\\n\\n-----------------\\n\\nThe following is the user's prompt:\\n\\n[user prompt]"
@}
@end example

If no relevant facts were found, the body says @code{"No relevant
previously known facts were found."} instead of listing facts.

@subsection Errors

@code{INVALID_INPUT}, @code{EMBEDDING_ERROR}, @code{DATABASE_ERROR}.

@node The list_memories tool
@section The @code{list_memories} tool
@cindex list_memories

Paginated chronological listing for review, audit, and cleanup
workflows.  Optional filters narrow the result to untagged rows,
very-short or very-long rows, or rows that haven't been confirmed
since a given timestamp --- the same filters are accepted by
@code{count_memories} so a client can preview the size of a cleanup
slice before listing it.

@subsection Inputs

@table @code
@item limit
Integer.  Optional, default 20, capped at @code{MAX_RECALL_LIMIT}.

@item offset
Integer.  Optional, default 0.

@item include_deleted
Boolean.  Optional, default false.  When true, soft-deleted memories
(tombstones) and expired memories are also returned.

@item untagged_only
Boolean.  Optional, default false.  When true, restrict to rows with
no tags (empty tag array).

@item min_chars
Integer.  Optional.  Return only rows whose @code{text} length is at
least this many characters.

@item max_chars
Integer.  Optional.  Return only rows whose @code{text} length is at
most this many characters.  Useful for finding fragments
(e.g.@: @code{max_chars=20}).

@item not_confirmed_since
ISO 8601 timestamp.  Optional.  Return only rows that have @b{not}
been confirmed since this instant --- a row qualifies if
@code{last_confirmed_at IS NULL} (never confirmed) or
@code{last_confirmed_at < this}.  Useful for finding stale memories
during cleanup.
@end table

When multiple filters are supplied they combine with AND.

@subsection Output

Same shape as @code{recall}'s @code{matches}, but with no @code{score}
field, and ordered by @code{created_at DESC}.

@subsection Errors

@code{INVALID_INPUT} (negative @code{min_chars} or @code{max_chars},
@code{min_chars > max_chars}, @code{not_confirmed_since} in the
future), @code{DATABASE_ERROR}.

@node The update_memory tool
@section The @code{update_memory} tool
@cindex update_memory

Updates an existing memory.  Each field except @code{id} is optional
and follows ``omit to leave unchanged'' semantics, so a caller can
correct only the tags, only the importance, only the freshness
timestamps, etc.  When @code{text} is supplied the embedding is
regenerated; when it is omitted the embedding (and the
@code{embedding_provider} / @code{embedding_model}) are left alone.
At least one of @code{text}, @code{tags}, @code{importance},
@code{expires_at}, or @code{last_confirmed_at} must be supplied.

@subsection Inputs

@table @code
@item id
@b{Required integer.}  The memory's id.

@item text
String.  Optional.  Replacement text; same length and secret-shape
constraints as @code{remember}.  Omit to leave text and embedding
unchanged.

@item tags
Array of strings.  Optional.  Replaces the tag list entirely if
provided.

@item importance
Number, 0--1.  Optional.

@item expires_at
ISO 8601 timestamp.  Optional.

@item last_confirmed_at
ISO 8601 timestamp.  Optional.  To refresh @b{just} this field
without otherwise touching the row, prefer the @code{confirm} tool.

@item dry_run
Boolean.  Optional, default false.  When true, validate the request
and report which fields would change, but make no writes.
@end table

@subsection Output

@example
@{
  "ok": true,
  "memory_id": 123,
  "dry_run": false,
  "changed_fields": ["tags", "importance"],
  "message": "Ok"
@}
@end example

@code{changed_fields} lists the field names the caller asked to
change.  On a dry-run, @code{message} reads @code{"Would update"}
instead.  Updating a soft-deleted memory fails with
@code{NOT_FOUND} --- forget and re-add instead.

@subsection Errors

@code{INVALID_INPUT} (no fields supplied, or an out-of-range value),
@code{NOT_FOUND}, @code{SECRET_REJECTED}, @code{EMBEDDING_ERROR},
@code{DATABASE_ERROR}.

@node The update_memory_batch tool
@section The @code{update_memory_batch} tool
@cindex update_memory_batch
@cindex bulk update

Updates up to @code{MAX_BATCH_SIZE} (default 200) memories in a
single call.  The embedding provider is invoked once per batch for
the items that supply new @code{text}; items that change only
metadata (tags, importance, freshness) don't call the embedder at
all, so a bulk tag-normalization pass is cheap.

Strongly prefer this over calling @code{update_memory} repeatedly
when correcting several memories at once.

@subsection Inputs

@table @code
@item items
@b{Required array.}  Each item is a partial @code{update_memory}
payload: @code{id} required, plus at least one of @code{text},
@code{tags}, @code{importance}, @code{expires_at},
@code{last_confirmed_at}.

@item dry_run
Boolean.  Optional, default false.  When true, validate every item
and report which fields would change, but make no writes.
@end table

@subsection Output

@example
@{
  "ok": true,
  "dry_run": false,
  "results": [
    @{ "input_index": 0, "id": 41, "ok": true,
       "changed_fields": ["tags"], "message": "Ok" @},
    @{ "input_index": 1, "id": 42, "ok": false,
       "error": @{ "code": "NOT_FOUND",
                  "message": "Memory 42 not found." @} @}
  ],
  "summary": @{ "total": 2, "updated": 1, "errors": 1 @}
@}
@end example

Per-item failures (null id, unknown id, secret rejected, embedding
failure on a single text) do @b{not} fail the rest of the batch.

@subsection Errors

Batch-level: @code{INVALID_INPUT} (empty list, over 200 items),
@code{LIMIT_EXCEEDED}.  Per-item errors appear inside @code{results}.

@node The confirm tool
@section The @code{confirm} tool
@cindex confirm

Refreshes a memory's @code{last_confirmed_at} to @code{now()} without
rebuilding the embedding.  Cheap operation.

@subsection Inputs

@table @code
@item id
@b{Required integer.}  The memory's id.
@end table

@subsection Output

@example
@{
  "ok": true,
  "memory_id": 123,
  "last_confirmed_at": "2026-05-17T14:00:00Z"
@}
@end example

@subsection Errors

@code{INVALID_INPUT}, @code{NOT_FOUND}.

@node The forget tool
@section The @code{forget} tool
@cindex forget
@cindex soft delete
@cindex tombstone

Deletes a memory.  Soft-delete by default (the row stays but is
hidden from @code{recall}/@code{list_memories}/@code{text_search} and
becomes a tombstone that the dedup-on-write check consults).  Pass
@code{hard_delete=true} to drop the row entirely.

@subsection Inputs

@table @code
@item id
@b{Required integer.}  The memory's id.

@item hard_delete
Boolean.  Optional, default false.  When true, the row is removed from
the database completely.

@item reason
String.  Optional.  Free-text reason recorded as @code{forget_reason}.
Rejected with @code{INVALID_INPUT} if @code{hard_delete=true} (a hard
delete has no row to attach the reason to).

@item replaced_by_id
Integer.  Optional.  Id of the memory that supersedes this one.  Same
restriction as @code{reason}: not allowed with @code{hard_delete}.

@item dry_run
Boolean.  Optional, default false.  When true, validate the request
and report what would happen, but make no changes.  The response
still reports @code{already_deleted} so the caller can preview the
outcome.
@end table

@subsection Output

@example
@{
  "ok": true,
  "memory_id": 123,
  "dry_run": false,
  "already_deleted": false,
  "message": "Forgotten"
@}
@end example

@code{already_deleted} is true when the row was already
soft-deleted before this call (the tombstone metadata is updated in
that case).  On a dry-run @code{message} reads @code{"Would
soft-delete"} / @code{"Would hard-delete"} / @code{"Would update
tombstone (already soft-deleted)"}.

@subsection Errors

@code{INVALID_INPUT}, @code{NOT_FOUND}, @code{DATABASE_ERROR}.

@node The forget_batch tool
@section The @code{forget_batch} tool
@cindex forget_batch
@cindex bulk delete

Soft-deletes up to @code{MAX_BATCH_SIZE} (default 200) memories in a
single call.  Soft-delete only by design --- a bulk hard delete has
no tombstone trail and is intentionally not exposed here.  Use
@code{forget} with @code{hard_delete=true} for individual rows that
need to be erased completely.

Strongly prefer this over calling @code{forget} repeatedly during
cleanup.  A batch payload carries only a list of integer ids, which
is also less likely to be misclassified by an LLM client's safety
filter than repeated single-id forgets whose context contains the
per-row memory text.

@subsection Inputs

@table @code
@item ids
@b{Required array of integers.}  The memory ids to forget.  Maximum
200 per call.

@item reason
String.  Optional.  Shared explanation recorded as
@code{forget_reason} on every soft-deleted row in the batch.

@item dry_run
Boolean.  Optional, default false.  When true, validate every id
and report what would happen, but make no changes.  Each result
still reports @code{already_deleted} reflecting current state.
@end table

@subsection Output

@example
@{
  "ok": true,
  "dry_run": false,
  "results": [
    @{ "input_index": 0, "id": 144, "ok": true,
       "already_deleted": false, "message": "Forgotten" @},
    @{ "input_index": 1, "id": 999999, "ok": false,
       "error": @{ "code": "NOT_FOUND",
                  "message": "Memory 999999 not found." @} @}
  ],
  "summary": @{ "total": 2, "deleted": 1,
                "already_deleted": 0, "errors": 1 @}
@}
@end example

If a row was already soft-deleted, the tombstone metadata is updated
(reason rewritten if supplied) and @code{already_deleted} is reported
true.

@subsection Errors

Batch-level: @code{INVALID_INPUT} (empty list, invalid reason),
@code{LIMIT_EXCEEDED} (over 200 items).  Per-item errors appear
inside @code{results}.

@node The find_near_duplicates tool
@section The @code{find_near_duplicates} tool
@cindex find_near_duplicates
@cindex duplicates
@cindex cleanup

Read-only diagnostic for memory cleanup.  Returns clusters of active
memories whose embeddings are at least @code{threshold} similar to
each other.  Clusters are formed by union-find over qualifying pairs
(so transitively similar rows a~b~c land in the same group) and
sorted strongest-first by the max pair-similarity within each
cluster.  Soft-deleted and expired rows are excluded.

Pair candidates are looked up via pgvector's HNSW index using a
fixed top-10 per row, which is more than enough at the cutoffs
typical for cleanup (@code{threshold >= 0.85}).

@subsection Inputs

@table @code
@item threshold
Number, 0.5--1.0.  Optional, default 0.92.  Cosine-similarity cutoff
for pair candidates.  0.95+ is typical for ``effectively identical''
rows.

@item max_groups
Integer.  Optional, default 50.  Hard cap 500.
@end table

@subsection Output

@example
@{
  "ok": true,
  "threshold": 0.92,
  "groups": [
    @{
      "ids": [4, 5],
      "max_similarity": 0.984,
      "pair_count": 1,
      "memories": [
        @{ "id": 4, "text": "...", "tags": ["family"], ... @},
        @{ "id": 5, "text": "...", "tags": ["family"], ... @}
      ]
    @}
  ],
  "summary": @{ "groups": 5, "pairs": 8 @}
@}
@end example

@code{pair_count} is the number of qualifying pairs inside that
cluster (always at least 1; higher means the cluster is denser).
@code{pairs} in the summary is the total raw pair count across all
returned clusters.

@subsection Errors

@code{INVALID_INPUT} (out-of-range threshold or max_groups),
@code{DATABASE_ERROR}.

@node The text_search tool
@section The @code{text_search} tool
@cindex text_search

Plain substring search (case-insensitive).  Useful for direct lookup
when you already know roughly what to find.  Indexed via
@code{pg_trgm} so partial matches are fast.

@subsection Inputs

@table @code
@item text
@b{Required string.}  The substring to find.

@item limit
Integer.  Optional, default 20.
@end table

@subsection Output

Same shape as @code{list_memories}.

@subsection Errors

@code{INVALID_INPUT}, @code{DATABASE_ERROR}.

@node The get_memory tool
@section The @code{get_memory} tool
@cindex get_memory

Fetches a single memory by id, including soft-deleted rows.  Useful
for inspecting one row surfaced by @code{recall},
@code{list_memories}, or as a near-duplicate candidate from
@code{remember}, and for examining tombstone metadata (@code{deleted_at},
@code{forget_reason}, @code{replaced_by_id}) of a soft-deleted row.

@subsection Inputs

@table @code
@item id
@b{Required integer.}  The memory's id.
@end table

@subsection Output

@example
@{
  "ok": true,
  "memory": @{
    "id": 123,
    "text": "...",
    "tags": ["family"],
    "importance": 0.5,
    "created_at": "2026-05-05T12:00:00Z",
    "updated_at": "2026-05-05T12:00:00Z",
    "deleted_at": null,
    "forget_reason": null,
    "replaced_by_id": null,
    "last_confirmed_at": "2026-05-05T12:00:00Z",
    "expires_at": null,
    "source_provider": "openai"
  @}
@}
@end example

@subsection Errors

@code{INVALID_INPUT}, @code{NOT_FOUND}, @code{DATABASE_ERROR}.

@node The count_memories tool
@section The @code{count_memories} tool
@cindex count_memories

Returns @code{COUNT(*)} over the memory store, with the same set of
optional filters that @code{list_memories} accepts plus tag and
source-provider filters.  Cheap; useful as a sanity check before a
bulk operation (``how many would I touch?'').

@subsection Inputs

@table @code
@item include_deleted
Boolean.  Optional, default false.

@item tags
Array of strings.  Optional.  A memory is counted if it has at least
one of these tags.

@item source_provider
String.  Optional exact-match filter on @code{source_provider}.

@item untagged_only
Boolean.  Optional.  Only count rows with no tags.

@item min_chars
Integer.  Optional.  Only count rows whose text length is at least
this many characters.

@item max_chars
Integer.  Optional.  Only count rows whose text length is at most
this many characters.

@item not_confirmed_since
ISO 8601 timestamp.  Optional.  Only count rows with
@code{last_confirmed_at IS NULL} or older than this instant.
@end table

@subsection Output

@example
@{
  "ok": true,
  "count": 412
@}
@end example

@subsection Errors

@code{INVALID_INPUT} (out-of-range filter values), @code{DATABASE_ERROR}.

@node The memory_stats tool
@section The @code{memory_stats} tool
@cindex memory_stats
@cindex stats

Aggregate statistics for the whole store: total / active /
soft-deleted / expired counts, average importance, oldest and newest
@code{created_at}, top tags by count, and counts per
@code{source_provider}.

@subsection Inputs

None.

@subsection Output

@example
@{
  "ok": true,
  "total":         412,
  "active":        400,
  "soft_deleted":  10,
  "expired":       2,
  "avg_importance": 0.55,
  "oldest_created_at": "2025-11-01T00:00:00Z",
  "newest_created_at": "2026-05-25T12:00:00Z",
  "top_tags": [
    @{ "tag": "family",      "count": 87 @},
    @{ "tag": "preferences", "count": 64 @}
  ],
  "by_provider": [
    @{ "provider": "openai", "count": 200 @},
    @{ "provider": "(none)", "count": 212 @}
  ]
@}
@end example

@subsection Errors

@code{DATABASE_ERROR}.

@node The list_tags tool
@section The @code{list_tags} tool
@cindex list_tags

Returns the distinct tags currently in use, each with the number of
memories carrying that tag.  Ordered by count descending, then tag
ascending.

@subsection Inputs

@table @code
@item include_deleted
Boolean.  Optional, default false.  When true, tags from soft-deleted
and expired rows are also surfaced.

@item limit
Integer.  Optional, capped server-side.
@end table

@subsection Output

@example
@{
  "ok": true,
  "tags": [
    @{ "tag": "family", "count": 87 @},
    @{ "tag": "work",   "count": 42 @}
  ]
@}
@end example

@subsection Errors

@code{INVALID_INPUT}, @code{DATABASE_ERROR}.

@node The export_memories tool
@section The @code{export_memories} tool
@cindex export_memories
@cindex backup

Dumps every memory for the user as a JSON array, ordered oldest-first.
Embedding vectors are @b{not} included --- exports are intended for
human-readable backup and migration, not for re-importing into a
different embedding model.  Capped server-side at a large but finite
number of rows per call.

@subsection Inputs

@table @code
@item include_deleted
Boolean.  Optional, default true so the export captures the full
historical record.
@end table

@subsection Output

Same per-row shape as @code{recall} matches, minus the @code{score}
field and the embedding vector:

@example
@{
  "ok": true,
  "count": 412,
  "memories": [
    @{ "id": 1, "text": "...", "tags": ["..."],
       "created_at": "2025-11-01T00:00:00Z", ... @}
  ]
@}
@end example

@subsection Errors

@code{LIMIT_EXCEEDED} when the store exceeds the export cap (in
which case obtain an out-of-band dump), @code{DATABASE_ERROR}.

@node Error codes
@section Error codes
@cindex error codes

Every error payload has the shape:

@example
@{
  "ok": false,
  "error": @{
    "code": "INVALID_INPUT",
    "message": "The text field is required."
  @}
@}
@end example

The full vocabulary:

@table @code
@item INVALID_INPUT
Missing required field, wrong type, out-of-range value, malformed
timestamp, etc.

@item AUTH_REQUIRED
No @code{Authorization} header was sent (HTTP 401).

@item AUTH_FAILED
@code{Authorization} header was present but the token didn't match
(HTTP 401).  The server does not distinguish ``missing'' from
``wrong'' in error text; both surface as 401 at the protocol level.

@item NOT_FOUND
The requested id doesn't exist.

@item SECRET_REJECTED
The submitted text matched the secret-shape detector (API key,
private key, JWT, etc.).

@item LIMIT_EXCEEDED
A pagination or batch parameter exceeded its hard cap.

@item EMBEDDING_ERROR
The embedding provider returned an error or didn't respond.  Includes
the provider's status code and message in @code{error.detail} when
available.

@item DATABASE_ERROR
PostgreSQL returned an error or the connection failed.

@item INTERNAL_ERROR
Catch-all for unexpected conditions.  The server logs the full
exception; the response carries only the generic message to avoid
leaking implementation detail.
@end table
