\input texinfo   @c -*- texinfo -*-
@c %**start of header
@setfilename ownsona.info
@settitle OwnSona Manual
@documentencoding UTF-8
@documentlanguage en
@finalout
@c %**end of header

@copying
This manual is for OwnSona, a single-user MCP (Model Context Protocol)
memory server.  OwnSona is built on the
@uref{https://kissweb.org, Kiss web development framework}, an
open-source Java full-stack framework that provides the servlet
container, JSON-RPC plumbing, connection pooling, and base classes
this server extends.

Copyright @copyright{} 2018--2026 Blake McBride.

Distributed under the BSD 2-Clause License.  See @file{LICENSE.txt}
in the source distribution for the full text.
@end copying

@dircategory Development
@direntry
* OwnSona: (ownsona).           Personal memory server for LLM clients.
@end direntry

@titlepage
@title OwnSona Manual
@subtitle One memory, every LLM.
@author Blake McBride

@page
@vskip 0pt plus 1filll
@insertcopying
@end titlepage

@contents

@ifnottex
@node Top
@top OwnSona

@insertcopying
@end ifnottex

@menu
* Introduction::                 What OwnSona is and why it exists.
* Getting Started::              A five-minute end-to-end walkthrough.
* Installation::                 Setting up the server on a Linux VPS.
* Configuration::                Every key in @file{application.ini}.
* MCP Tools::                    The protocol surface, one tool per section.
* Server Internals::             Architecture, schema, security model.
* Connecting Claude::            Claude Desktop, Anthropic API, Claude Code.
* Connecting OpenAI::            ChatGPT and the OpenAI Responses API.
* The Command-Line Client::      Portable C client for scripting + admin.
* The teach Workflow::           Bulk-loading from long-form prose.
* Embedding Migration::          Switching model or provider.
* Tutorials::                    End-to-end walkthroughs.
* Troubleshooting::              Symptom-to-cause lookups.
* Reference::                    Configuration keys, schema, file layout.
* Contributing::                 How to send a patch.
* Index::                        Concept index.
@end menu

@include intro.texi
@include getting-started.texi
@include install.texi
@include configuration.texi
@include mcp-tools.texi
@include server-internals.texi
@include client-claude.texi
@include client-openai.texi
@include cli.texi
@include teach.texi
@include reembed.texi
@include tutorials.texi
@include troubleshooting.texi
@include reference.texi
@include contributing.texi

@node Index
@unnumbered Index
@printindex cp

@bye
