@node Troubleshooting
@chapter Troubleshooting
@cindex troubleshooting

Symptom-to-cause lookups for problems that come up in practice.  Each
entry names the failure mode, where to look, and what to fix.

@menu
* Server won't start::
* MCP returns 401::
* MCP returns 500 or EMBEDDING_ERROR::
* No matches from recall::
* Tomcat won't bind 443::
* Deploy is slow or first request 404s::
* Migration failures::
* Re-embed walker problems::
* Backup problems::
* CLI: build failures::
* CLI: server unreachable::
@end menu

@node Server won't start
@section Server won't start
@cindex won't start

@subsection Symptom

@code{systemctl status ownsona.service} shows the service failed, or
the servlet refuses to load.

@subsection Look in

@example
journalctl -u ownsona.service -e
journalctl -u ownsona.service | grep -i exception
@end example

@subsection Common causes

@table @asis
@item Missing required @file{application.ini} key
The static initializer fails fast on
@code{Required application.ini key X is not set}.  Fix the ini in the
source tree, rebuild, redeploy.

@item Database unreachable
@code{Connection refused} or @code{authentication failed} during pool
init.  Verify with @code{psql -U ownsona -d ownsona} from the same
host.

@item Auto-migrator can't @code{CREATE TABLE}
@code{migrator bootstrap failed: permission denied for schema public}.
The @code{ownsona} role lacks @code{CREATE ON SCHEMA public}.  Run
@code{sql/migrator_prep.sql} as the @code{postgres} superuser
(@pxref{Upgrading an existing install}).

@item Auto-migrator refuses to start
@code{Database is at version N but code expects M --- refusing}.
The DB is newer than the code (rollback scenario, or someone deployed
an older WAR).  Either upgrade the code or restore the DB from a
snapshot at version @code{M}.
@end table

@node MCP returns 401
@section MCP returns 401
@cindex 401 Unauthorized
@cindex OAuth troubleshooting

Every request comes back @code{401 Unauthorized}.

The 401 response carries a @code{WWW-Authenticate: Bearer ...,
resource_metadata="..."} header.  That header is informative: it
names the resource-metadata URL the client should re-fetch to
re-discover the AS, and (if the validation reached that point)
carries an @code{error_description} naming the specific failure.

@subsection Possible causes

@itemize @bullet
@item @b{Client is sending no token.}  The MCP client was added with
auth mode ``No auth'' or hasn't completed the OAuth login.  Open
the client's connector settings and re-run the OAuth flow.

@item @b{Token expired.}  Access tokens default to 1-hour TTL.
Compliant MCP clients refresh silently using their stored refresh
token; if they didn't, restart the client or trigger a reconnect.

@item @b{Refresh token revoked / AS signing key rotated.}  Every
issued JWT becomes unverifiable when the AS signing key is
replaced.  This happens if the AS state file at
@code{OAuthAsIniFile} was deleted or overwritten --- common after a
redeploy when @code{OAuthAsIniFile} was left at its
WAR-tree-internal default.  Recovery: the client redoes the full
OAuth login flow.  Prevention: set @code{OAuthAsIniFile} to an
absolute path outside the webapp (see @ref{Installation}).

@item @b{OAuth resource server not enabled.}  If
@code{OAuthAuthorizationServer} is unset in
@file{application.ini}, the entire OAuth path returns 500 (not
401) with ``OAuth resource-server is not configured.''  Check
@code{journalctl -u ownsona.service}.

@item @b{Token issued by a different AS.}  Token @code{iss} doesn't
match @code{OAuthAuthorizationServer}.  Happens when you have
multiple environments (staging, prod) and a client is talking to
one with a token issued by the other.
@end itemize

@subsection Verify

Without a token, you should get a 401 with a proper challenge
header:

@example
curl -sS -i -X POST https://<host>/mcp \
    -H "Content-Type: application/json" \
    -d '@{"jsonrpc":"2.0","id":1,"method":"initialize","params":@{@}@}'
@end example

Look for the @code{WWW-Authenticate: Bearer ...} header.  If the
response is 500 instead of 401, the OAuth resource server isn't
configured.  If it's 200 (unauthenticated success), the AS isn't
enabled but the server didn't refuse the request --- check
@code{OAuthAuthorizationServer} in @file{application.ini}.

With a valid token (obtained via any OAuth-capable MCP client):

@example
curl -sS -X POST https://<host>/mcp \
    -H "Authorization: Bearer $OWNSONA_ACCESS_TOKEN" \
    -H "Content-Type: application/json" \
    -d '@{"jsonrpc":"2.0","id":1,"method":"initialize","params":@{@}@}'
@end example

@code{200} with a server-info payload means the OAuth path is
working end-to-end.

@node MCP returns 500 or EMBEDDING_ERROR
@section MCP returns 500 or @code{EMBEDDING_ERROR}

A @code{remember} or @code{recall} call fails.

@subsection Look in

@example
journalctl -u ownsona.service | tail -100
@end example

@subsection Common causes

@itemize @bullet
@item @b{OpenAI key invalid / quota exhausted.}  Response detail says
@code{insufficient_quota} or @code{invalid_api_key}.  Top up the
account or rotate the key in @file{application.ini}.

@item @b{Embedding endpoint URL wrong.}  Connection refused or HTTP
404.  Verify @code{EMBEDDING_ENDPOINT}.

@item @b{Vector dimension mismatch.}
@code{ERROR: expected 1536 dimensions, not 3072}.  The
@code{EMBEDDING_DIMENSIONS} in @file{application.ini} doesn't match
the @code{vector(N)} column type.  Fix one or the other.

@item @b{Database connection pool exhausted.}  Symptom is hangs
followed by timeouts.  Restart the service as a quick fix; look for
connection leaks if it recurs.
@end itemize

@node No matches from recall
@section No matches from @code{recall}

@code{recall} returns @code{"matches": []} for a query that should
clearly hit.

@subsection Cause matrix

@itemize @bullet
@item @b{Store is empty.}  @code{ownsona list --limit 1} returns
nothing.  Add facts first.

@item @b{Tag filter excludes everything.}  The @code{tags} parameter
is a strict filter --- a memory must have at least one of the listed
tags to qualify.  Remove the filter or fix the tag list.

@item @b{The fact was soft-deleted.}  Pass
@code{ownsona list --include-deleted} to see tombstones.  If the row
is there with a non-null @code{deleted_at}, it was forgotten.

@item @b{The fact expired.}  @code{recall} excludes memories where
@code{expires_at} has passed.  Check via SQL:

@example
SELECT id, text, expires_at FROM memories
WHERE expires_at IS NOT NULL AND expires_at < now();
@end example

@item @b{Embedding model changed without re-embed.}  If you switched
@code{EMBEDDING_MODEL} but @code{REEMBED_ON_STARTUP} was never set to
@code{true}, old rows have vectors in the old model's space, query
vectors are in the new model's space, and cosine distance is noise.
Trigger a re-embed (@pxref{Embedding Migration}).
@end itemize

@node Tomcat won't bind 443
@section Tomcat won't bind 443

@subsection Symptom

@code{BindException: Permission denied} in
@code{journalctl -u ownsona.service}, or @code{Address already in use}.

@subsection Causes

@itemize @bullet
@item @b{Missing @code{AmbientCapabilities}.}  Check
@code{/etc/systemd/system/ownsona.service} has
@code{AmbientCapabilities=CAP_NET_BIND_SERVICE}.  If not, the unit was
edited and lost the cap.  Restore it from @file{sql/ownsona.service}.

@item @b{Another process holds the port.}  @code{sudo ss -tlnp | grep :443}.
Often a leftover manually-launched Tomcat (@code{startup.sh}).  Kill
it.

@item @b{Keystore file missing or unreadable by the @code{ownsona}
user.}  @code{ls -l /home/ownsona/tomcat/conf/tomcat.p12}.  Should be
@code{owner=ownsona, mode 600}.
@end itemize

@node Deploy is slow or first request 404s
@section Deploy is slow or first request 404s

@subsection Cause

Tomcat's @code{autoDeploy} window: after you copy @code{Kiss.war} into
@file{webapps/}, Tomcat takes ~10 s to undeploy the old app and
deploy the new one.  During that window every request is 404.

@subsection Action

Wait.  If it's longer than ~30 s, check
@code{tomcat/logs/localhost.<date>.log} for an exception in the
servlet's static initializer (most often: missing
@file{application.ini} key, or @code{unpackWARs="false"} in
@code{server.xml}).

@node Migration failures
@section Migration failures

@subsection Symptom

Journal shows:

@example
migration v=N name="..." failed: ...
@end example

The servlet refuses to load.

@subsection Diagnosis

The failed migration's transaction rolled back, so the database is at
the prior version.  Look at the underlying exception
(@code{permission denied}, @code{column already exists}, etc.) and
fix the underlying cause.  Once the fix is in place, redeploy --- the
auto-migrator will retry the same migration from the same point.

The most common cause for first-time installs is missing privileges.
Run @code{sql/migrator_prep.sql} as the @code{postgres} superuser
(@pxref{Upgrading an existing install}).

@node Re-embed walker problems
@section Re-embed walker problems

Covered in detail in @ref{Recovery after a failed run}.  Summary:

@itemize @bullet
@item The walker is resumable.  Killing it and restarting just picks
up from the next stale row.

@item @code{REEMBED_ON_STARTUP=true} but no rows show up as stale?
The walker is doing the right thing --- if every row already matches
the active provider/model, there's nothing to do.  The walker logs
@code{reembed: done count=0} and flips the flag.

@item Walker died mid-run?  Look for the exception; the most common
cause is an embedding-provider error (key invalid, rate-limited,
endpoint unreachable).  Fix and restart.
@end itemize

@node Backup problems
@section Backup problems

@subsection Symptom

@code{ownsona-backup.service} timer fires but no file lands in
@file{/mnt/backups/}.

@subsection Diagnosis

@example
sudo tail -100 /var/log/ownsona-backup.log
mountpoint /mnt/backups       # is the bucket mounted?
sudo /etc/mount-s3fs           # remount if not
@end example

If @code{s3fs} fails to mount, the credentials in
@file{/etc/passwd-s3fs} are wrong, the bucket name is wrong, or the
IAM user lacks
@code{s3:GetObject}/@code{s3:PutObject}/@code{s3:ListBucket}.

@node CLI: build failures
@section CLI: build failures

@subsection @code{curl.h: No such file or directory}

libcurl development headers aren't installed.

@itemize @bullet
@item Fedora: @code{sudo dnf install libcurl-devel}
@item Debian/Ubuntu: @code{sudo apt install libcurl4-openssl-dev}
@item macOS: @code{brew install curl}
@item MSYS2: @code{pacman -S mingw-w64-ucrt-x86_64-curl}
@end itemize

@subsection @code{undefined reference to curl_easy_init}

The link step couldn't find libcurl.  Should normally be auto-detected;
if not, the Makefile falls back to dynamic linking and prints a
warning.  Check @code{which curl-config} returns a path.

@subsection Build succeeds but binary segfaults

Very rare.  Usually means an ABI mismatch between libcurl headers used
to compile and the libcurl shared library found at runtime.  Rebuild
on the same machine you'll run on, or statically link.

@node CLI: server unreachable
@section CLI: server unreachable

@subsection Symptom

Every subcommand fails with a connection error.

@subsection Diagnosis

@example
ownsona --json list 2>&1 | head -20
@end example

@itemize @bullet
@item @code{Could not resolve host}: DNS or @code{server_url} typo.
@item @code{Connection refused}: nothing listening on the port (server
down?).
@item @code{SSL certificate problem}: hostname mismatch, expired cert,
self-signed cert without a trust anchor.  Verify with @code{curl -I
https://<host>/mcp}.
@item @code{401 Unauthorized}: see @ref{MCP returns 401}.
@end itemize
