@node Tutorials
@chapter Tutorials
@cindex tutorials
@cindex walkthroughs

End-to-end walkthroughs for tasks that span multiple chapters.  Each
tutorial is self-contained but links back into the reference chapters
for detail.

@menu
* First memories::               Start an empty store, add a few facts, recall.
* Importing from a journal::     Bulk-load a long-form text via `teach`.
* Correcting a fact with a trail::    Forget + replace, leaving a tombstone.
* Switching embedding providers::     End-to-end re-embed walkthrough.
* Auditing what's stored::       List, search, group-by SQL.
@end menu

@node First memories
@section First memories

Goal: confirm the whole pipeline works end-to-end by storing your
first three facts and recalling them.

Assume the server is up and you've built the CLI (@pxref{The
Command-Line Client}).

@example
ownsona add "My dog's name is Mochi."             --tags family,pets
ownsona add "I prefer concise answers."           --tags preferences
ownsona add "The Q3 forecast lives in ~/work/q3/" --tags work
@end example

Each call should print @code{Ok (id=N)}.

Recall:

@example
ownsona query "what's my dog's name"
@end example

Should return the Mochi memory with a high score (around 0.85+).

@example
ownsona query "how should you answer me"
@end example

Should return the ``concise answers'' memory.  Note that the score is
lower (around 0.5--0.6) because the query is more abstract --- semantic
recall, not keyword match.

List everything:

@example
ownsona list
@end example

Three rows, newest first.

@node Importing from a journal
@section Importing from a journal

Goal: hand the @code{teach} subcommand a multi-thousand-word document
and let it extract durable facts.

Suppose @file{my-journal.txt} contains 30 KB of personal notes
(travel, projects, family events, books read, etc.).

@b{Step 1: dry-run, write to file for review.}

@example
ownsona teach my-journal.txt --subject Blake --output review.json
@end example

Open @file{review.json} in an editor.  You'll see a JSON array of
facts in third-person.  Cull anything that's:

@itemize @bullet
@item Already in the store (re-runs of @code{teach} won't double-up
thanks to @code{skip_if_near} dedup, but reviewing keeps the import
clean).
@item Time-sensitive and unlikely to stay true.
@item Phrased awkwardly --- edit in place.
@item Plain wrong (the LLM occasionally misreads context).
@end itemize

@b{Step 2: commit via @code{import}.}

@example
ownsona import review.json --dedup skip_if_near
@end example

You'll see a summary like @code{inserted=42 duplicates=3 errors=0
(total=45)}.  The 3 duplicates are facts that already existed; nothing
got double-stored.

@b{Step 3: spot-check.}

@example
ownsona query "<something that should now be remembered>"
@end example

The new fact should be the top hit.

@node Correcting a fact with a trail
@section Correcting a fact with a trail

Goal: replace an outdated fact, leave a tombstone that records the
correction.

Suppose memory id 42 says ``My dog's name is Mochi'' but the dog
actually went by Coco from day one.  You want to:

@itemize @bullet
@item Add the correct fact.
@item Forget the wrong one.
@item Leave a trail so future @code{remember} calls about ``my dog's
name'' will be flagged with @code{previously_corrected}.
@end itemize

@example
# Add the correct fact, getting back its new id.
ownsona add "My dog's name is Coco." --dedup skip_if_near
# Output: Ok (id=99)

# Forget the old fact, recording why and pointing at the replacement.
ownsona forget 42 --reason "misremembered name" --replaced-by 99
# Output: Forgotten (id=42)
@end example

Now if anyone tries to @code{remember "Mochi is my dog's name"} (or
something semantically similar), the response will include a
@code{previously_corrected} array showing the tombstone with its
@code{forget_reason} and @code{replaced_by_id}.  The calling LLM can
warn before re-introducing the corrected fact.

@node Switching embedding providers
@section Switching embedding providers

Goal: move from @code{text-embedding-3-small} (1536-dim) to
@code{text-embedding-3-large} at the same 1536-dim.

This is a same-dimension switch, so no schema change is needed.  The
full procedure lives in @ref{Embedding Migration}; the summary:

@enumerate
@item Back up the database.

@item Edit @file{<tomcat>/webapps/ROOT/WEB-INF/backend/application.ini}:

@example
EMBEDDING_MODEL    = text-embedding-3-large
REEMBED_ON_STARTUP = true
@end example

@item Restart:

@example
sudo systemctl restart ownsona.service
@end example

@item Watch the log:

@example
journalctl -u ownsona.service -f | grep reembed
@end example

@item Verify all rows moved:

@example
sudo -u ownsona psql -d ownsona -c \
  "SELECT embedding_model, count(*) FROM memories GROUP BY 1;"
@end example

@item Update the source-tree @file{application.ini} so the next WAR
build matches.
@end enumerate

A different-dimension switch adds one step: write a migration class
that resizes the vector column.  See @ref{Procedure B: different-dimension switch}.

@node Auditing what's stored
@section Auditing what's stored

Goal: get a high-level picture of what's in the store.

@subsection Count by tag

@example
sudo -u ownsona psql -d ownsona <<'EOF'
SELECT unnest(tags) AS tag, count(*) AS n
FROM memories
WHERE deleted_at IS NULL
GROUP BY 1
ORDER BY n DESC;
EOF
@end example

@subsection Count by capture mode

How many memories were explicitly requested vs.@: inferred by the LLM:

@example
SELECT metadata->>'capture_mode' AS mode, count(*)
FROM memories
WHERE deleted_at IS NULL
GROUP BY 1;
@end example

@subsection Oldest and newest memories

@example
(SELECT id, text, created_at FROM memories WHERE deleted_at IS NULL ORDER BY created_at LIMIT 3)
UNION ALL
(SELECT id, text, created_at FROM memories WHERE deleted_at IS NULL ORDER BY created_at DESC LIMIT 3);
@end example

@subsection Tombstone history

@example
SELECT id, text, deleted_at, forget_reason, replaced_by_id
FROM memories
WHERE deleted_at IS NOT NULL
ORDER BY deleted_at DESC;
@end example

These are operator queries --- they bypass the MCP layer entirely,
which is exactly the point: they're for you, not for the LLM.
