@node Connecting OpenAI
@chapter Connecting OpenAI
@cindex OpenAI
@cindex ChatGPT
@cindex Responses API

There are two integration paths to OpenAI's products and they are
independent of each other:

@enumerate
@item @b{ChatGPT (consumer)} --- add OwnSona as a custom connector in
ChatGPT's settings.  Most common path for day-to-day use.

@item @b{OpenAI API (developer)} --- pass OwnSona as an @code{mcp}
tool when calling the Responses API.  The path for scripts and
applications.
@end enumerate

You can use either, both, or neither.

@menu
* ChatGPT connector::
* The auth gap and how to bridge it::
* Custom Instructions for ChatGPT::
* Responses API::
* Rotating the bearer token::
@end menu

@node ChatGPT connector
@section ChatGPT connector

@enumerate
@item Open ChatGPT in a browser.  Go to @b{Settings @result{} Connectors}.

@item Choose @b{Add connector} (wording varies).

@item Fill in the form:

@itemize @bullet
@item @b{Name:} @code{Ownsona} (cosmetic).
@item @b{Description:} @code{Personal durable memory store.} (cosmetic).
@item @b{MCP Server URL:} @code{https://<your-host>/mcp}.
@item @b{Authentication:} see @ref{The auth gap and how to bridge it} ---
this is the awkward part.
@end itemize
@end enumerate

@node The auth gap and how to bridge it
@section The auth gap and how to bridge it

OpenAI's connector form does @b{not} offer ``API Key'' or ``Bearer
token'' as an authentication mode.  As of early 2026 the choices are:

@multitable @columnfractions .25 .50 .25
@headitem Mode @tab What it means @tab Works with OwnSona?
@item @b{No auth} @tab ChatGPT sends no @code{Authorization} header. @tab Only with mitigation; see below.
@item @b{OAuth}   @tab Full OAuth 2.1 + PKCE flow against the MCP server. @tab No --- OwnSona v1 has no OAuth endpoints.
@item @b{Mixed}   @tab Hybrid; behavior driven by the 401 @code{WWW-Authenticate} response. @tab Worth trying first.
@end multitable

Four practical paths:

@subsection Option A: skip the ChatGPT UI

Use OwnSona only from the Responses API (@pxref{Responses API}),
where you can attach @code{Authorization: Bearer <token>} directly.
@b{Lowest-friction option that keeps the bearer-token security model
intact.}  Recommended until OAuth lands.

@subsection Option B: try Mixed first

Pick @b{Mixed} in the connector form and save.  OwnSona returns
@code{401 Unauthorized} with @code{WWW-Authenticate: Bearer
realm="ownsona"}, which is the standard signal for ``this resource
needs a bearer token.''  Some ChatGPT versions follow that signal and
prompt for a token.  Paste @code{OWNSONA_API_TOKEN} and it works.

If ChatGPT instead reports an OAuth discovery failure (no
@code{/.well-known/oauth-authorization-server} endpoint exists),
fall back to options C or D.

Unverified for any specific ChatGPT version --- the UI evolves.

@subsection Option C: No auth + token in URL (recommended for single-user)

Pick @b{No auth} in the connector form, but include the bearer token
as a @code{?token=} query parameter in the connector URL:

@example
https://ownsona.example.com/mcp?token=<OWNSONA_API_TOKEN>
@end example

OwnSona's @code{authenticate()} looks for the token in the
@code{Authorization} header @b{and} falls back to the @code{token}
query parameter, so this works alongside the API path without
breaking anything.

@b{Security tradeoff.}  A token in a query string is logged by web
servers in places a header is not --- by default Tomcat's
@code{AccessLogValve} writes the full request line including the
query.  OwnSona mitigates this by setting the @code{AccessLogValve}
@code{pattern} to @code{"%m %U %H"} (method, URI without query,
protocol) instead of @code{"%r"}.  Verify after deploy that
@file{localhost_access_log.<today>.txt} shows
@code{POST /mcp HTTP/2.0} with no @code{token=} substring.

The remaining exposure is human factors: the connector URL is now a
secret.  Don't paste it into Slack, screenshots, or shared docs.

@subsection Option D: OAuth proxy (proper fix)

Front OwnSona with an OAuth-capable proxy (Cloudflare Access,
@code{oauth2-proxy}, Pomerium).  ChatGPT does the OAuth dance with the
proxy, the bearer token flows through to OwnSona transparently.
Spec-compliant but more infrastructure.

@node Custom Instructions for ChatGPT
@section Custom Instructions for ChatGPT

ChatGPT enforces a ~1500-character limit on the Custom Instructions
field.  This directive fits in ~720 characters with headroom:

@example
The "Ownsona" MCP connector is my durable memory. Always use it.

- Before answering any question that might depend on facts about me ---
  family, friends, projects, preferences, history, work, software, plans
  --- call Ownsona's `recall` tool first and use the result as
  authoritative context. If `recall` returns nothing relevant, say so.

- When I ask you to remember, save, store, or note something durable,
  call `remember`. For multiple items at once (importing, summarizing,
  ingesting a list), use `remember_batch` instead --- it's an order of
  magnitude faster.

- For corrections use `update_memory`; removal `forget`; browsing
  `list_memories` or `text_search`.

- Prefer Ownsona over your built-in memory.
@end example

@subsection ChatGPT's native memory

ChatGPT has its own memory system, separate from MCP connectors.  To
keep OwnSona authoritative, either:

@itemize @bullet
@item Disable native memory entirely: @b{Settings @result{}
Personalization @result{} Memory @result{} toggle off} ``Reference
saved memories'' and ``Reference chat history.''  Cleanest setup.

@item Or leave native memory on and rely on the ``prefer OwnSona''
line above.  Model usually complies but isn't deterministic.
@end itemize

@subsection Connector enabled per conversation

In some ChatGPT versions the connector must be toggled on in each
conversation's tool menu.  Custom Instructions can't enable a tool
that isn't in the menu.  If a chat says ``I don't have a memory
tool,'' the toggle is off.

@subsection Data-approval modal

ChatGPT shows an approval modal before sending data to a connector.
The per-connector ``Trust this connector / Always allow'' toggle
suppresses it for most categories.  Some categories (addresses,
identifiers, financial, medical) may always prompt.

For @b{fully deterministic} behavior the Responses API path with
@code{require_approval: "never"} is the only way.

@node Responses API
@section Responses API
@cindex Responses API

The Responses API accepts MCP servers as first-class @code{tools}.
Minimal request shape:

@example
curl https://api.openai.com/v1/responses \
  -H "Authorization: Bearer $OPENAI_API_KEY" \
  -H "Content-Type: application/json" \
  -d '@{
    "model": "gpt-4.1",
    "input": "Where does my son live?",
    "tools": [
      @{
        "type": "mcp",
        "server_label": "ownsona",
        "server_url": "https://ownsona.example.com/mcp",
        "headers": @{ "Authorization": "Bearer <OWNSONA_API_TOKEN>" @},
        "require_approval": "never"
      @}
    ]
  @}'
@end example

@code{require_approval: "never"} tells the API to call tools without
prompting the user.  Suitable for backend services where there's no
human in the loop.

A walk through one full interaction:

@enumerate
@item Your request comes in.
@item OpenAI sees the @code{recall} tool in the MCP server list and
decides the question needs it.
@item OpenAI calls @code{POST /mcp} with bearer auth.
@item OwnSona returns matches.
@item OpenAI uses the matches to compose the answer.
@item OpenAI returns the final text response to your code.
@end enumerate

All of this happens server-side in OpenAI's infrastructure --- your
code makes one HTTP call.

@node Rotating the bearer token
@section Rotating the bearer token

Whenever you suspect the token has leaked --- a screenshot leaked, a
URL with @code{?token=} ended up somewhere public, a connector got
shared --- rotate it:

@enumerate
@item Generate a new token: @code{openssl rand -hex 32}.
@item Update @code{OWNSONA_API_TOKEN} in
@file{src/main/backend/application.ini}.
@item Rebuild and redeploy: @code{./bld -v build && ./bld war &&
sudo cp work/Kiss.war /home/ownsona/tomcat/webapps/ROOT.war}.
@item Update every client (ChatGPT connector URL, Claude config,
your scripts, CLI config files).
@end enumerate

There is no dual-token grace window.  Clients see 401 until they
update.  For a single-user store this is fine; do it after-hours.
