@node Configuration
@chapter Configuration
@cindex configuration
@cindex application.ini

OwnSona reads every setting from a single file:
@file{src/main/backend/application.ini}.  The file is INI-format, all
keys live under the @code{[main]} section, and the servlet loads it
once at startup via Kiss's @code{MainServlet.readIniFile} mechanism.

The file is gitignored.  A template lives at
@file{src/main/backend/application.ini.example}; copy it on first
install and edit in place.

@b{When a change to @file{application.ini} takes effect.}  Editing the
source-tree copy alone does nothing.  The build (@code{./bld -v
build && ./bld war}) copies the file into the WAR.  When you replace
the deployed WAR, the servlet picks up the new values on next start.
Tomcat's @code{autoDeploy="true"} restarts the webapp automatically
about ten seconds after the WAR replaces the previous one; restart
the service explicitly with @code{systemctl restart ownsona.service}
if you want it immediate.

@menu
* Required keys::
* Optional keys with defaults::
* Database keys::
* Embedding keys::
* Tunables::
* Re-embedding flag::
@end menu

@node Required keys
@section Required keys

These three must be set or the servlet refuses to load.

@table @code
@item OWNSONA_API_TOKEN
The bearer token MCP clients must present in
@code{Authorization: Bearer <token>}.  Generate a long random string;
@code{openssl rand -hex 32} produces 64 hex chars and is more than
enough.

@item EMBEDDING_API_KEY
The API key for the embeddings endpoint.  Vendor-agnostic in name;
in practice an OpenAI key today.  If you swap providers, this is the
key for the new provider.

@item EMBEDDING_DIMENSIONS
The vector length the active model produces.  @b{Must match the
@code{vector(N)} column type} in @file{sql/001_init.sql}.  Mismatch
fails every insert at the database with a vector-length error.
@end table

@node Optional keys with defaults
@section Optional keys with defaults

@table @code
@item EMBEDDING_PROVIDER
Default @code{openai}.  Recorded on every row's @code{embedding_provider}
column so the system can tell which provider produced which vector.

@item OWNSONA_USER_ID
Default @code{default}.  Single-user mode stamps every memory with this
value.  Multi-user is deliberately unsupported.

@item DEFAULT_RECALL_LIMIT
Default @code{8}.  Number of memories returned by @code{recall} when
the caller doesn't specify @code{limit}.

@item MAX_RECALL_LIMIT
Default @code{50}.  Hard cap on the @code{limit} parameter of any
read tool.  A client asking for 1000 gets 50.

@item MAX_TEXT_CHARS
Default @code{16000}.  Hard cap on a single memory's @code{text}.
Anything longer is rejected with @code{INVALID_INPUT}.

@item MAX_BATCH_SIZE
Default @code{200}.  Max items per @code{remember_batch} call.
@end table

@node Database keys
@section Database keys

Kiss reads these directly; OwnSona doesn't process them.

@table @code
@item DatabaseType
Must be @code{PostgreSQL}.  Other databases lack @code{pgvector} (or
the rest of the schema features we use) and are not supported.

@item DatabaseHost
Hostname or IP.  Usually @code{localhost} since the DB lives on the
same VM as Tomcat.

@item DatabasePort
Default @code{5432}.

@item DatabaseName
Default @code{ownsona}.

@item DatabaseUser
Default @code{ownsona}.

@item DatabasePassword
Generated by @file{sql/setup_db.sh} or set by hand.

@item DatabaseConnectionParameters
Optional.  Appended to the JDBC URL --- e.g.@: @code{sslmode=require}.
@end table

@node Embedding keys
@section Embedding keys

@table @code
@item EMBEDDING_ENDPOINT
The full URL of the embeddings POST endpoint.  For OpenAI:
@code{https://api.openai.com/v1/embeddings}.  For an OpenAI-compatible
proxy, point at the proxy.  For a self-hosted Ollama with the OpenAI
shim, e.g.@: @code{http://localhost:11434/v1/embeddings}.

@item EMBEDDING_MODEL
The model identifier sent in the request body.  For OpenAI:
@code{text-embedding-3-small} or @code{text-embedding-3-large}.  For
other providers, the provider's model name.

@item EMBEDDING_DIMENSIONS
See @ref{Required keys}.
@end table

@node Tunables
@section Tunables

@table @code
@item MaxWorkerThreads
Default @code{30}.  Inherited from Kiss; sets the upper bound on
concurrent MCP requests.  For a single-user store, 30 is wildly more
than necessary.

@item UserInactiveSeconds
Default @code{900}.  Kiss's session-inactivity timeout.  Not used by
OwnSona's bearer-auth path, but the framework expects it.
@end table

@node Re-embedding flag
@section Re-embedding flag
@cindex REEMBED_ON_STARTUP

@table @code
@item REEMBED_ON_STARTUP
Default @code{false}.  When set to @code{true}, the server runs
@code{ReembedJob} on startup, re-embedding every row whose
@code{(embedding_provider, embedding_model)} doesn't match the active
config or whose @code{embedding} is NULL.  After a successful walk
the server auto-flips this back to @code{false} in the deployed
@file{application.ini}.

See @ref{Embedding Migration} for the full procedure.
@end table
