@node Embedding Migration
@chapter Embedding Migration
@cindex embedding migration
@cindex re-embed
@cindex ReembedJob

OwnSona stores every memory's text alongside a vector embedding of
that text.  Recall, dedup-on-write, and conflict surfacing all rely on
those vectors.  Sooner or later you will want to switch to a different
embedding model or a different embedding provider, and the existing
vectors will need to be replaced --- vectors from different models
live in different spaces, and cosine distance between them is noise.

This chapter explains @b{when and why} you might switch, and the
@b{exact mechanics} of doing so cleanly.  It is the canonical
operational reference for embedding migrations.

@menu
* When and why you might switch::
* What is and isn't affected::
* How re-embedding works inside the server::
* Procedure A: same-dimension switch::
* Procedure B: different-dimension switch::
* Monitoring progress::
* Recovery after a failed run::
* Cost of re-embedding::
* Pitfalls and gotchas::
@end menu

@node When and why you might switch
@section When and why you might switch
@cindex reasons to switch embedding

Realistic triggers, in roughly increasing order of urgency:

@itemize @bullet
@item @b{Cost.}  A new model from the same provider, or a different
provider entirely, comes in at half the per-token price.  At thousands
of memories this matters less than at millions, but it matters.

@item @b{Quality.}  A newer or larger model produces measurably better
recall on your kind of facts.  Embedding-model leaderboards (e.g.@:
MTEB) move every few months; what was state-of-the-art two years ago
is often surpassed today.

@item @b{Provider deprecation.}  Your current provider end-of-lifes
the model you embedded under.  Migrating @b{before} they yank the API
is cheaper than scrambling after.

@item @b{Vendor diversity / data sovereignty.}  You decide you no
longer want your memory texts traveling to a third party for
embedding.  You move to a self-hosted model (Ollama,
sentence-transformers, BGE, etc.).

@item @b{Local privacy / air-gap.}  Same as above: the entire pipeline
becomes on-host.  No outbound traffic at all.

@item @b{You changed your mind about the dimension.}  You started with
a 1536-dim model because that was the default and now want to drop to
768 to save disk + index memory, or move up to 3072 for higher
quality.
@end itemize

You are @b{not} changing the LLMs that use the memory store --- Claude,
ChatGPT, Gemini connect over MCP and don't care which embedding model
produced the vectors they're searching.  The CLI's @code{teach}
subcommand uses an independent LLM for fact extraction (separate
config, separate endpoint, separate API key) and has no data-shape
effect on the server.  Switching the server's embedding provider has
no effect on the @code{teach} LLM, and vice versa.

@node What is and isn't affected
@section What is and isn't affected

Every memory row carries @code{embedding}, @code{embedding_provider},
@code{embedding_model}, and a stored @code{text}.  A re-embed pass:

@b{Replaces:}
@itemize @bullet
@item Every row's @code{embedding} with a vector from the new
provider/model.
@item Every row's @code{embedding_provider} and @code{embedding_model}
to match the active config.
@end itemize

@b{Leaves untouched:}
@itemize @bullet
@item @code{text}, @code{normalized_text}, @code{tags},
@code{importance}, @code{metadata}.
@item @code{created_at}, @code{updated_at}, @code{deleted_at}.
@item @code{expires_at}, @code{last_confirmed_at}.
@item @code{forget_reason}, @code{replaced_by_id}.
@item @code{record_version}, @code{user_id}.
@item All indexes (rebuilt automatically by Postgres when the column
type changes, or explicitly dropped + recreated for performance).
@end itemize

@b{Important: soft-deleted rows are re-embedded.}  Tombstones
participate in dedup-on-write via @code{findSimilarTombstones}, so
their vectors have to move into the new model's space along with
everything else.  If the walker skipped them, the dedup-on-write check
would start returning gibberish for previously-corrected facts.

@node How re-embedding works inside the server
@section How re-embedding works inside the server
@cindex ReembedJob startup order
@cindex MCPServer clinit

The walker is @code{ReembedJob}
(@file{src/main/precompiled/ai/ownsona/embeddings/ReembedJob.java}).
It runs from @code{MCPServer.<clinit>} after @code{DbMigrator} and
@code{RecordMigrator}, and only when @code{REEMBED_ON_STARTUP=true} in
@file{application.ini}.  On clean completion it flips that flag back
to @code{false} so a routine restart doesn't accidentally re-trigger
the walker.

Order at startup:

@example
1. DbMigrator        --- applies any new schema migrations
2. RecordMigrator    --- runs per-row upgraders
3. ReembedJob        --- re-embeds stale rows (only if REEMBED_ON_STARTUP=true)
@end example

The ordering matters: a different-dimension switch ships a
@b{migration} that resizes the @code{embedding} column.  The migration
runs first, then the walker fills the now-resized column with new
vectors.

The walker:

@itemize @bullet
@item Selects rows where @code{embedding IS NULL} @b{or}
@code{embedding_provider IS DISTINCT FROM <active>} @b{or}
@code{embedding_model IS DISTINCT FROM <active>}, paginating by id.
@item Reads each batch's @code{text} in a single query.
@item Calls @code{EmbeddingProvider.embedBatch()} once per batch
(default batch size 50).
@item Writes new vector + new provider + new model back, one row at a
time, in a single transaction per batch.
@end itemize

A crash mid-walk loses at most one batch.  The next restart re-runs
from exactly the rows still showing the old provider/model.  Resumable
by virtue of the SELECT filter --- no state file, no checkpoint
bookkeeping.

@node Procedure A: same-dimension switch
@section Procedure A: same-dimension switch
@cindex same-dimension switch

Use when: the new model produces vectors of the @b{same dimension} as
the old one.  Examples:

@itemize @bullet
@item Stay at 1536; switch from @code{text-embedding-3-small} to
@code{text-embedding-3-large@@1536} (OpenAI supports a
@code{dimensions} parameter that truncates the larger model's output).
@item Swap to a self-hosted 1536-dim model.
@item Switch from one 768-dim model to another 768-dim model after a
prior dim-change.
@end itemize

@b{No code or schema changes are required.}  The whole procedure is
config + restart.

@enumerate
@item @b{Back up the database.}

@example
sudo systemctl stop ownsona.service
pg_dump -h localhost -U ownsona ownsona > /var/backups/ownsona-pre-reembed-$(date +%F).sql
sudo systemctl start ownsona.service
@end example

(Or rely on your nightly backup --- but a fresh dump immediately before
re-embed is safer.)

@item @b{Edit the deployed @file{application.ini}} at
@file{<tomcat>/webapps/ROOT/WEB-INF/backend/application.ini}:

@example
EMBEDDING_PROVIDER   = openai
EMBEDDING_MODEL      = text-embedding-3-large
EMBEDDING_DIMENSIONS = 1536
EMBEDDING_API_KEY    = sk-...                # if it changed
EMBEDDING_ENDPOINT   = https://api.openai.com/v1/embeddings

REEMBED_ON_STARTUP   = true
@end example

@item @b{Restart the service.}

@example
sudo systemctl restart ownsona.service
@end example

@item @b{Watch the log.}

@example
journalctl -u ownsona.service -f
@end example

You'll see, in order:

@example
migrator: db_version at N, target N, nothing to apply
record_migrator: done upgraded=0 failed=0
reembed: starting active_provider=... active_model=... dims=...
reembed: progress count=50
reembed: progress count=100
...
reembed: done count=N
ApplicationIniWriter: set REEMBED_ON_STARTUP = false in <path>
@end example

The server is @b{serving requests during the walker's run}.  Recall on
rows already updated uses new-model vectors; recall on rows not yet
updated uses old-model vectors.  Within either cohort, results are
correct; across cohorts, scores are not meaningfully comparable.  For
a single-user store this window is minutes, not hours.

@item @b{Verify and propagate.}

@example
SELECT embedding_provider, embedding_model, count(*)
FROM memories
GROUP BY 1, 2;
@end example

Should show one row, with the new provider/model and a count matching
@code{count(*)} overall.

The walker auto-flips @code{REEMBED_ON_STARTUP=false} in the deployed
@file{application.ini}, but the @b{source tree} still has it at
@code{true}.  Before your next WAR build, update
@file{src/main/backend/application.ini} (and the example file) to
match, so the next deploy doesn't accidentally re-trigger the walker.
@end enumerate

@node Procedure B: different-dimension switch
@section Procedure B: different-dimension switch
@cindex different-dimension switch
@cindex vector column resize

Use when: the new model's output dimension differs from the existing
column (e.g.@: moving from 1536 to 3072, or 1536 to 768).  The
@code{vector(N)} column type @b{must be resized first} --- pgvector
cannot store a 3072-element vector in a @code{vector(1536)} column.
The schema change ships as an @b{additive migration} that runs before
the walker.

@enumerate
@item @b{Write a new migration class} at
@file{src/main/precompiled/ai/ownsona/migrations/MigrationNNN_resize_embedding_to_N.java}:

@example
package ai.ownsona.migrations;

import org.kissweb.database.Connection;

public final class Migration005ResizeEmbeddingTo3072 implements Migration @{
    @@Override public int version() @{ return 5; @}
    @@Override public String name()  @{ return "resize embedding to vector(3072)"; @}
    @@Override public void apply(Connection db) throws Exception @{
        // Relax NOT NULL so we can null out via the type change.
        db.execute("ALTER TABLE memories ALTER COLUMN embedding DROP NOT NULL");
        // Resize.  USING NULL = discard old vectors; the walker
        // rebuilds them from each row's text on this same startup.
        db.execute("ALTER TABLE memories ALTER COLUMN embedding TYPE vector(3072) USING NULL");
    @}
@}
@end example

@b{Why this can ship as an additive migration despite clearing the
column:} the embedding column is @emph{derived data}.  The texts that
produced the old vectors are still in the @code{text} column.  Nulling
out the embedding column and re-filling it from the texts in the same
startup sequence loses nothing the system can't rebuild.  This is a
narrow, deliberate exception to the additive-only invariant ---
dim-change migrations may clear the embedding column iff the same
commit sets @code{REEMBED_ON_STARTUP=true}.

@item @i{Optional: drop the HNSW index first.}  If you have thousands
of rows, dropping the index before the walker and recreating it after
avoids paying incremental HNSW insertion cost on every batch.  Add to
the migration:

@example
db.execute("DROP INDEX IF EXISTS memories_embedding_idx");
@end example

The matching @code{CREATE INDEX} step at the end is one-time operator
work --- a follow-up @code{psql} command after the walker finishes ---
because it must run @b{after} the walker, not before it.

@item @b{Register the migration and bump the version.}  In
@file{src/main/precompiled/ai/ownsona/migrations/MigrationRegistry.java}:

@example
public static final int CURRENT_DB_VERSION = 5;
...
m.add(new Migration005ResizeEmbeddingTo3072());
@end example

@item @b{Update @file{application.ini}} (source tree, and on the server)
with the new @code{EMBEDDING_MODEL}, @code{EMBEDDING_DIMENSIONS=3072},
@code{EMBEDDING_API_KEY} (if it changed), and
@code{REEMBED_ON_STARTUP=true}.

@item @b{Back up the database.}

@example
pg_dump -h localhost -U ownsona ownsona > /var/backups/ownsona-pre-reembed-$(date +%F).sql
@end example

@item @b{Build, deploy, restart.}  Normal WAR-swap deploy:

@example
./bld -v build && ./bld war
sudo cp work/Kiss.war /home/ownsona/tomcat/webapps/ROOT.war
sudo systemctl restart ownsona.service
@end example

@item @b{Watch the log.}  In order:

@example
migrator: applied v=5 name="resize embedding to vector(3072)" ms=...
record_migrator: done ...
reembed: starting active_provider=... active_model=... dims=3072
reembed: progress count=...
reembed: done count=...
ApplicationIniWriter: set REEMBED_ON_STARTUP = false ...
@end example

@item @b{If you dropped the HNSW index in step 2}, recreate it now that
the walker has filled every row:

@example
sudo -u ownsona psql -d ownsona -c \
    "CREATE INDEX memories_embedding_idx ON memories USING hnsw (embedding vector_cosine_ops);"
@end example

@item @b{Optional cleanup: restore NOT NULL} on the embedding column
in a follow-up migration (@code{Migration006}).  Strictly optional ---
the server always sets @code{embedding} on insert / update.  If you
do, ship it in a later commit after you've confirmed every row has a
non-NULL embedding.

@item @b{Propagate} the source-tree @file{application.ini} flip (see
step 5 of @ref{Procedure A: same-dimension switch}).
@end enumerate

@node Monitoring progress
@section Monitoring progress

@subsection Status query

To see what state the store is currently in:

@example
SELECT embedding_provider, embedding_model, count(*)
FROM memories
GROUP BY 1, 2
ORDER BY count(*) DESC;
@end example

Mid-walk this returns two rows (old and new), shifting as the walker
progresses.  After completion it returns one row.

@subsection Rows still needing re-embed

@example
SELECT count(*) FROM memories
WHERE embedding IS NULL
   OR embedding_provider IS DISTINCT FROM 'openai'
   OR embedding_model    IS DISTINCT FROM 'text-embedding-3-large';
@end example

@subsection Watching the walker live

@example
journalctl -u ownsona.service -f | grep -E 'reembed:|migrator:'
@end example

The @code{reembed: progress count=N} lines tick by once per batch (50
rows by default).

@node Recovery after a failed run
@section Recovery after a failed run
@cindex re-embed failure
@cindex rollback

@subsection Walker interrupted

The walker is resumable by design.  Kill the JVM mid-run, then
@code{systemctl restart ownsona.service}, and it picks up exactly the
rows still showing the old provider/model.  No state to clean up.

@subsection Walker failed mid-run

Look at the exception in @code{journalctl -u ownsona.service}.  Common
causes:

@itemize @bullet
@item @b{Embedding endpoint unreachable / API key wrong.}  Fix
@file{application.ini} and restart.

@item @b{Rate-limit / 429.}  The walker treats this as a fatal error
and aborts the run; the next restart resumes.  For a one-off run on a
small store you'll usually outrun the rate limit; for a large store
you may want to lower @code{BATCH_SIZE} in @file{ReembedJob.java}.

@item @b{Different-dimension migration ran but
@code{EMBEDDING_DIMENSIONS} in config doesn't match the column type.}
The walker will try to write wrong-size vectors and fail at the
database with a vector dimension mismatch error.  Fix the config and
restart.
@end itemize

@subsection Full rollback

If the new model is producing terrible recall and you want to revert:

@enumerate
@item Stop the service.
@item Restore from the pre-deploy backup:

@example
sudo -u postgres psql ownsona < /var/backups/ownsona-pre-reembed-<date>.sql
@end example

@item Revert @file{application.ini} to the old @code{EMBEDDING_MODEL}
/ @code{EMBEDDING_DIMENSIONS} / @code{EMBEDDING_API_KEY}.

@item If you also ran a dim-change migration, redeploy a WAR built
from the pre-dim-change commit (i.e.@: one whose
@code{CURRENT_DB_VERSION} is lower).  @code{DbMigrator} refuses to
start against a @emph{higher}-version DB, so you must restore the DB
first or ship code matching the DB version.

@item Start the service.
@end enumerate

This is the ``data is not cheap'' branch --- the backup is the only
thing that gets you back cleanly.  Take backups @b{before} the deploy,
not after.

@node Cost of re-embedding
@section Cost

Embedding APIs are priced per token.  For a single-user store of a few
thousand short memories, a full re-embed costs cents to single-digit
dollars.  Rough estimates (OpenAI list prices, may have changed):

@multitable @columnfractions .30 .35 .35
@headitem Memories × avg tokens @tab @code{text-embedding-3-small} @tab @code{text-embedding-3-large}
@item 1,000 × 40 tokens   @tab ~$0.001 @tab ~$0.005
@item 10,000 × 40 tokens  @tab ~$0.01  @tab ~$0.05
@item 100,000 × 40 tokens @tab ~$0.10  @tab ~$0.50
@end multitable

Self-hosted models (Ollama, sentence-transformers) cost zero per token
but you pay in compute time on the host.

@node Pitfalls and gotchas
@section Pitfalls and gotchas

@itemize @bullet
@item @b{The auto-flip writes to the deployed copy of
@file{application.ini}, not the source tree.}  After a successful run,
the file at @file{<tomcat>/webapps/ROOT/WEB-INF/backend/application.ini}
has @code{REEMBED_ON_STARTUP = false}, but
@file{src/main/backend/application.ini} (the source you build from)
still has it at @code{true}.  Update the source-tree copy before your
next WAR build, or the next deploy will silently kick off a no-op
walker on startup (harmless but wastes time and logs noise).

@item @b{@file{application.ini} is gitignored}, so a PR review won't
catch a stale source copy.  The example file ships
@code{REEMBED_ON_STARTUP = false}, so fresh installs start in the
right state.

@item @b{@code{EMBEDDING_DIMENSIONS} must match the @code{vector(N)}
column type.}  If they disagree, every write fails at the database
with a vector dim mismatch.  Postgres enforces this, not OwnSona ---
the error surfaces at insert/update time, not at startup.

@item @b{Hard-deleted rows mid-walk don't break the walker.}  If a row
is hard-deleted between the id scan and the per-batch text fetch, it
silently drops out of the batch.  No re-embed, no error.

@item @b{There's no MCP tool to trigger a re-embed.}  Deliberate ---
admin operations stay outside the MCP surface so any LLM holding the
bearer can't initiate them.  The trigger is editing
@file{application.ini} and restarting, which is an operator action.

@item @b{Vendor neutrality is preserved.}  The walker doesn't know or
care whether the provider is OpenAI, Cohere, Voyage, BGE, Ollama, or
anything else.  It only knows about the @code{EmbeddingProvider}
interface.  To add a new provider, write a new @code{EmbeddingProvider}
implementation and update the instantiation in
@code{MCPServer.<clinit>} --- the rest of the system (migrations,
walker, repository, tools) is provider-agnostic.
@end itemize
