@node Reference
@chapter Reference
@cindex reference

Catalogues that are easier to consult as tables than to read as prose.

@menu
* Configuration keys table::
* Database schema reference::
* File and directory layout::
* Environment variables::
* Kiss framework references::
@end menu

@node Configuration keys table
@section Configuration keys table

Every key recognized in @file{src/main/backend/application.ini}.

@subsection Required

@multitable @columnfractions .30 .70
@headitem Key @tab Purpose
@item @code{DatabaseHost} @tab Postgres host.
@item @code{DatabasePort} @tab Postgres port.
@item @code{DatabaseName} @tab Database name (typically @code{ownsona}).
@item @code{DatabaseUser} @tab Application role.
@item @code{DatabasePassword} @tab Password for the application role.
@item @code{OWNSONA_API_TOKEN} @tab Bearer token MCP clients must present.
@item @code{EMBEDDING_API_KEY} @tab API key for the embeddings endpoint.
@item @code{EMBEDDING_ENDPOINT} @tab Full URL of the @code{/embeddings} endpoint.
@item @code{EMBEDDING_MODEL} @tab Embedding model identifier.
@item @code{EMBEDDING_DIMENSIONS} @tab Vector length. Must match @code{vector(N)} column.
@end multitable

@subsection Optional with defaults

@multitable @columnfractions .30 .15 .55
@headitem Key @tab Default @tab Purpose
@item @code{DatabaseType} @tab @code{PostgreSQL} @tab Kiss DB driver type (only PostgreSQL supported).
@item @code{DatabaseConnectionParameters} @tab (none) @tab Appended to JDBC URL.
@item @code{OWNSONA_USER_ID} @tab @code{default} @tab User-id stamped on every memory.
@item @code{EMBEDDING_PROVIDER} @tab @code{openai} @tab Provider name recorded per row.
@item @code{DEFAULT_RECALL_LIMIT} @tab @code{8} @tab Default @code{limit} for @code{recall}.
@item @code{MAX_RECALL_LIMIT} @tab @code{50} @tab Hard cap on @code{limit}.
@item @code{MAX_TEXT_CHARS} @tab @code{16000} @tab Hard cap on memory text length.
@item @code{MAX_BATCH_SIZE} @tab @code{200} @tab Max items per @code{remember_batch}.
@item @code{REEMBED_ON_STARTUP} @tab @code{false} @tab Triggers the re-embed walker. Auto-flipped after success.
@item @code{MaxWorkerThreads} @tab @code{30} @tab Kiss tunable: concurrent request cap.
@item @code{UserInactiveSeconds} @tab @code{900} @tab Kiss tunable: session inactivity timeout.
@end multitable

@subsection Connection pool tunables (Kiss-provided)

Rarely changed.  Defaults come from c3p0; override when your workload
calls for it.

@multitable @columnfractions .40 .60
@headitem Key @tab Purpose
@item @code{DatabaseMinPoolSize} @tab Minimum connections kept hot.
@item @code{DatabaseInitialPoolSize} @tab Pool size at startup.
@item @code{DatabaseMaxPoolSize} @tab Hard cap on pool size.
@item @code{DatabaseAcquireIncrement} @tab Connections added per growth step.
@item @code{DatabaseCheckoutTimeout} @tab Millis to wait before timing out.
@item @code{DatabaseMaxStatements} @tab Prepared-statement cache size.
@item @code{DatabaseIdleTestPeriod} @tab Seconds between idle-connection tests.
@item @code{DatabaseMaxIdleTime} @tab Seconds before removing idle connections.
@end multitable

@node Database schema reference
@section Database schema reference

The full schema lives in @file{sql/001_init.sql}.  Migrations after
that point are Java classes under
@file{src/main/precompiled/ai/ownsona/migrations/}.

@subsection The @code{memories} table

Documented per-column in @ref{The memories table}.

@subsection Indexes (current shape)

@multitable @columnfractions .35 .15 .50
@headitem Index @tab Type @tab Purpose
@item @code{memories_user_id_idx} @tab B-tree @tab Per-user filter.
@item @code{memories_created_at_idx} @tab B-tree @tab Listing newest first.
@item @code{memories_deleted_at_idx} @tab B-tree @tab Tombstone filter.
@item @code{memories_tags_idx} @tab GIN @tab Tag filter on @code{tags}.
@item @code{memories_text_trgm_idx} @tab GIN @tab Trigram for @code{text_search}.
@item @code{memories_embedding_idx} @tab HNSW @tab Cosine-similarity recall.
@item @code{memories_unique_normalized_active} @tab Unique partial @tab Exact-duplicate prevention.
@end multitable

@subsection The @code{db_version} table

Created by @code{DbMigrator} on first startup.

@multitable @columnfractions .25 .25 .50
@headitem Column @tab Type @tab Purpose
@item @code{version} @tab @code{INT PRIMARY KEY} @tab Migration's target version.
@item @code{applied_at} @tab @code{TIMESTAMPTZ NOT NULL DEFAULT now()} @tab When it ran.
@item @code{note} @tab @code{TEXT} @tab Migration's @code{name()}.
@end multitable

@node File and directory layout
@section File and directory layout

@example
ownsona/                                   # repo root
    bld                                     # Kiss build script
    src/
        main/
            backend/
                application.ini.example     # redacted template (tracked)
                application.ini             # live secrets (gitignored)
                KissInit.groovy             # Kiss app bootstrap
            core/                           # Kiss framework (do NOT modify)
                org/kissweb/MCPServerBase.java
                org/kissweb/restServer/MainServlet.java
            precompiled/
                ai/ownsona/
                    MCPServer.java          # @@WebServlet("/mcp")
                    Config.java             # application.ini loader
                    SecretScanner.java
                    TextNormalizer.java
                    TagNormalizer.java
                    VectorFormat.java
                    ApplicationIniWriter.java
                    embeddings/
                        EmbeddingProvider.java
                        OpenAIEmbeddingProvider.java
                        MockEmbeddingProvider.java
                        ReembedJob.java
                    memory/
                        MemoryService.java
                        MemoryRepository.java
                        ...
                    migrations/
                        Migration.java
                        MigrationRegistry.java
                        DbMigrator.java
                        Migration002AddRecordVersion.java
                        Migration003AddFreshness.java
                        Migration004AddTombstones.java
        test/
            precompiled/ai/ownsona/         # JUnit 5 tests
    sql/
        001_init.sql                        # bootstrap schema
        setup_db.sh                         # role + extensions + 001_init.sql
        migrator_prep.sql                   # one-time prep for existing installs
        smoke_test.sh                       # end-to-end curl drive
        run_tests.sh                        # JUnit runner
        ownsona.service                     # systemd unit
        ownsona-backup.service / .timer
    cli/                                    # portable C command-line client
        Makefile
        config.ini.example
        include/ownsona.h
        src/*.c
    manual/                                 # this manual (TexInfo + HTML output)
    REEMBED.md                              # short reference; full chapter is in manual/
    OWNSONA_SPEC.md                         # functional spec
    INSTALL.md                              # install walkthrough (long-form)
    MCPServer.md                            # server design notes
    OpenAI.md                               # OpenAI integration notes
    CLI.md                                  # CLI reference (short-form)
    README.md
@end example

@node Environment variables
@section Environment variables

Most settings live in @file{application.ini} or the CLI's
@file{config.ini}, but a few work via environment:

@multitable @columnfractions .35 .65
@headitem Variable @tab Purpose
@item @code{OWNSONA_TEST_DATABASE_URL} @tab JDBC URL for a separate test database.  Gates the integration tests in @code{sql/run_tests.sh}; absent = skip.
@item @code{OWNSONA_API_TOKEN} @tab Used by @file{sql/smoke_test.sh} when invoked from the shell.
@item @code{OWNSONA_SERVER} @tab CLI override for @code{server_url}.
@item @code{OWNSONA_TOKEN} @tab CLI override for @code{token}.
@item @code{OWNSONA_CONFIG} @tab CLI override for the config-file path.
@item @code{OWNSONA_LLM_API_KEY} @tab CLI: API key for the @code{teach} LLM.
@item @code{OWNSONA_LLM_MODEL} @tab CLI: model name for the @code{teach} LLM.
@item @code{OWNSONA_LLM_BASE_URL} @tab CLI: base URL for the @code{teach} chat-completion endpoint.
@item @code{OWNSONA_SUBJECT} @tab CLI: how @code{teach} should refer to you in extracted facts.
@end multitable

@node Kiss framework references
@section Kiss framework references
@cindex Kiss
@cindex Kiss framework

OwnSona is built on the
@uref{https://kissweb.org, Kiss web development framework}, an
open-source Java full-stack framework.  Kiss provides:

@itemize @bullet
@item The @code{MainServlet} container glue that loads
@file{application.ini}, sets up the C3P0 connection pool, and exposes
the @code{Connection}/@code{Record} database API used throughout
OwnSona.
@item The @code{MCPServerBase} class @code{MCPServer.java} extends ---
parses JSON-RPC envelopes, dispatches to tool handlers, formats tool
results.
@item The custom @code{bld} build script (no Maven, no Gradle).
@item The @code{org.kissweb.json} classes used for all server-side
JSON manipulation.
@item The @code{IniFile} class @code{ApplicationIniWriter} works
alongside.
@end itemize

Where to read more:

@multitable @columnfractions .35 .65
@headitem Resource @tab URL
@item Kiss home page         @tab @uref{https://kissweb.org}
@item Kiss source            @tab @uref{https://github.com/blakemcbride/Kiss}
@item Kiss user manual       @tab @uref{https://kissweb.org/manual.html}
@item Frontend JSDoc         @tab @uref{https://kissweb.org/jsdoc/}
@item Backend JavaDoc        @tab generated locally with @code{./bld javadoc} into @file{work/javadoc/}
@end multitable

OwnSona's relationship to Kiss: OwnSona is a Kiss @emph{application}.
The Kiss source ships inside the OwnSona repo at
@file{src/main/core/} and is the part of the codebase OwnSona @b{must
not modify} (rebuilding from the upstream Kiss release is the way to
update Kiss itself).  OwnSona's own code lives in
@file{src/main/precompiled/} and @file{src/main/backend/}.

When in doubt about where a feature lives --- the database pool, the
INI loader, the servlet base class --- start by asking whether it's a
Kiss feature.  Most ``how does the framework do X'' answers are in
Kiss's manual, not in this one.
