@node The teach Workflow
@chapter The @code{teach} Workflow
@cindex teach
@cindex prose import
@cindex autobiography

The @code{teach} subcommand of the CLI takes a plain-text file ---
autobiography draft, journal, notes, anything narrative --- and uses
an LLM to extract durable third-person facts, then submits them as a
batch of memories.  It's the fastest way to seed your store with the
content of a document you've already written.

This is the only subcommand that calls a generative LLM directly.
The server is not involved in the extraction; the CLI talks to the
chat-completion endpoint on its own.  The extracted facts go into the
server via the same @code{remember_batch} path any other client
uses.

@menu
* What it does::
* Requirements and configuration::
* Default behavior: dry-run::
* Committing the extracted facts::
* Flags::
* Recommended workflow::
* Cost::
* Vendor neutrality::
* Why the teach LLM is independent::
@end menu

@node What it does
@section What it does

@enumerate
@item Reads the file and splits it into chunks (default 4000 characters,
broken at paragraph then sentence boundaries).

@item For each chunk, POSTs to your configured chat-completion endpoint
(@code{@{llm_base_url@}/chat/completions}) with a system prompt that
instructs the model to extract durable facts as a JSON array.

@item Collects all returned facts across chunks.

@item @b{Default behavior: dry-run.}  Prints the JSON to stdout (or
@code{--output FILE}) so you can review before committing.

@item If you pass @code{--commit}, submits the facts via
@code{remember_batch} in 200-at-a-time chunks, with
@code{dedup_policy=skip_if_near} by default so re-runs after manuscript
edits don't double up.
@end enumerate

@node Requirements and configuration
@section Requirements and configuration

@code{teach} needs the LLM keys filled in.  In your CLI config file
(see @ref{The Command-Line Client}):

@example
llm_api_key  = sk-...
llm_model    = gpt-4o              # default; --model overrides per-run
llm_base_url = https://api.openai.com/v1
subject_name = Blake               # how `teach` refers to you in facts
@end example

Or via environment:
@code{OWNSONA_LLM_API_KEY}, @code{OWNSONA_LLM_MODEL},
@code{OWNSONA_LLM_BASE_URL}, @code{OWNSONA_SUBJECT}.

Or per-invocation: @code{--api-key}, @code{--model}, @code{--base-url},
@code{--subject}.

@node Default behavior: dry-run
@section Default behavior: dry-run

Without @code{--commit}, the command runs the LLM extraction and
prints a JSON array of proposed facts:

@example
ownsona teach my-life.txt --subject Blake
@end example

You'll see something like:

@example
[
  @{ "text": "Blake started programming in 1982.", "tags": ["history"] @},
  @{ "text": "Blake's first computer was an Apple II+.", "tags": ["history","computing"] @},
  @{ "text": "Blake lives in Tennessee.", "tags": ["personal","location"] @},
  ...
]
@end example

You can redirect to a file with @code{--output review.json} and edit
by hand.

@node Committing the extracted facts
@section Committing the extracted facts

Once you're happy with the extraction:

@example
ownsona teach my-life.txt --subject Blake --commit
@end example

Or, after dry-run + manual review of @code{review.json}, use
@code{import} (no second LLM call):

@example
ownsona import review.json --dedup skip_if_near
@end example

The two-step path (dry-run @result{} review @result{} import) avoids
spending a second LLM call when you decide to edit the result.

@node Flags
@section Flags

@multitable @columnfractions .30 .70
@headitem Flag @tab Purpose
@item @code{--subject NAME}     @tab How to refer to you in facts (default @code{the user}; set to your name).
@item @code{--model NAME}       @tab Override the LLM model for this run.
@item @code{--chunk-size N}     @tab Characters per LLM call (default 4000; valid 500--32000).
@item @code{--tags T1,T2}       @tab Apply these tags to every extracted fact.
@item @code{--dedup POLICY}     @tab @code{dedup_policy} for the resulting @code{remember_batch} (default @code{skip_if_near}).
@item @code{--max-facts N}      @tab Sanity cap on total extracted facts (default 10000).
@item @code{--commit}           @tab Actually insert (default is dry-run).
@item @code{--yes}              @tab With @code{--commit}, skip the y/N confirmation prompt.
@item @code{--output FILE}      @tab In dry-run, write JSON here instead of stdout.
@end multitable

@node Recommended workflow
@section Recommended workflow

@example
# 1) Extract to a file for review.
ownsona teach my-life.txt --subject Blake --output review.json

# 2) Open review.json, edit if you want.

# 3) Submit the reviewed file via `import` (no second LLM call).
ownsona import review.json --dedup skip_if_near
@end example

@code{--dedup skip_if_near} is the right default for re-runs: if you
edit the manuscript and re-extract, near-duplicates from the prior
run will be skipped instead of creating doubles.

@node Cost
@section Cost

A 100K-word autobiography is about 150 chunks of 4000 characters each.
Approximate cost:

@multitable @columnfractions .35 .65
@headitem Model @tab Approx. cost for 100K words
@item @code{gpt-4o-mini} @tab $0.05 -- $0.15
@item @code{gpt-4o}      @tab $1 -- $3
@end multitable

Numbers vary with chunk size and how dense the extraction is.
Dry-runs cost the same as commits --- the LLM call is the expense,
the @code{remember_batch} insertion is free.

@node Vendor neutrality
@section Vendor neutrality

The @code{--model} flag and @code{llm_base_url} config key let you
point @code{teach} at any service that exposes OpenAI's
@code{/chat/completions} shape: OpenAI, OpenRouter, Anthropic via a
compat proxy, a local Ollama server, etc.  Default is OpenAI's
endpoint.

@node Why the teach LLM is independent
@section Why the teach LLM is independent

The CLI's @code{teach} LLM is configured @b{separately} from the
server's embedding provider, and there's no mechanical link between
them.  Changing one doesn't affect the other.

In practice, when you switch the server's embedding provider, you
often want to swap @code{teach}'s extraction LLM at the same time
(same vendor, same key, same billing).  But the choice is yours:
you can run OpenAI embeddings on the server and a self-hosted
Llama for @code{teach} extraction if you prefer.

Switching @code{teach}'s LLM does @b{not} require a re-embed.
@code{teach} only produces text; the server embeds the text
exactly the same way regardless of where the text came from.
See @ref{Embedding Migration} for when a re-embed @emph{is} needed.
